

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10095-10276
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
C
R
S-E-C-R-E-T
20 September 1960
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT
Summary of STESCALADE - Audio Operation
Against the New China News Agency in Havana
In May 1959, the New China News Agency (NCMA) opened
an office in Havana in the El Medico Building which is occupied
partly by business concerns and partly used for residential aparte
ments. Shortly thereafter, the Havana Station obtained the con-
currence of Ambassador Bonsal and Miss Carolyn O. Stacey, an
Embassy employee, to mount an audio operation against NCNA through
the wall of the adjacent apartment in which Miss Stacey lived. In
November 1959, the FE Division sent one case officer and one TSD
technician to Havana, and the installation of a microphone and tape
recorder was completed in Miss Stacey's apartment on 29 November
1959.
2. By June 1960, it had become evident that two other rooms
occupied by NCNA possibly housed communication equipment and
were used for conferences. At that time Bryan Mills, FE Division
case officer, went to Havana and explored the possibility of improving.
the operation, He managed to lease an apartment directly over the
NCNA office and arranged for a stay-behind agent to occupy this space.
3. In August 1960, a team of three TSD technicians who were
in Havana on a separate SR Division operation agreed to install the --
additional equipment required for the NCNA operation. A second FE
Division case officer, Robert Neet, came down to Havana; and he,
together with the technicians, installed a probe microphone and tape
recorder in the apartment obtained by Mills over the NCNA office.
About this time the equipment was removed from Miss Stacey'a
apartment, with the exception of the plastic probe which was left
in the wall and plastered over.

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
66
(.
€ 6 3 0
3. Request for black transport should include:
1. Requent that RELEASE CONTINGENCY OFLAN 62-2 be implemented.
2. Port of entry.
3. Duts, Local time, and air?lold desired for plak up.
4. Desired destination.
5. Other requirements, ie., stretchers or bunks in the event
subjects are hospital cases.
6.
%
Name, organization and telephone number of requesting party.
Name and telephone number of KUBARK qantests at loading
ard off-loading points.
C. The following personnel are knowledgeable and charged with the
responsibility of activating this plar:
1. Major Richard I. Skinner, AC/ASD/DD/P
Organization: Air Support Division, DD/P
Home Phone: JE 3-1409
Office Phone:
Sterile Numbers NE 8-5285, EX J-8515
Extensions 6862,7664,7367.
Red Line 1058
2. Mr. Robert Marrero
Organization: Air Support Division, DD/P
Home Phone: JA 4-3598
Office Phone: Same as 1.
3. Major Billy B. Campbell, Commander, Dat. 1.
Organization: Dat. 1, 1045th Operational Evaluation and
Training Group, Eglin Air Force Base, Florida.
662737
Home Phone:
Office Phone: Eglin Air Force Besa, Florida 631590
4. Major Kenneth R. Burten, Cas Officer, Det. 1..
Organization: Dat. 1, 1045th Operational Evaluation and
Training Group, Eglin Air Force Base, Florida.
662464
Home Phone:
Office Paste: Eglin A Force Base, Florida 631213
S-E-C-R-E-T

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
4.
of the thinness of the cover, it is uncertain whether this will succeed.
11. A cleared and vi tting law firm in New York has been briefed.
by Mr. L. Houston on the situation with the thought that inquiries
received by the cover company could be referred to the firm of
lawyers from whom no comment would be obtained by the press or
other inquirers. The law firm has been briefed on the entire situa-
tion so that they may be in a position to act if any action by them
appears desirable or feasible. It would not appear that much support
of any kind can be obtained from the law firm or the law firms in
Cuba which are associated with them.
12. Insofar as the families are concerned, one of the technicians
is a bachelor presently on home leave between two tours in Japan.
His father, a cook in a diner in the Boston area, has been contacted
by the Office of Security, and he will get in touch with Security if
he receives any inquiries on this matter. Security, by the same
token, will keep in touch with him as the Cubans reveal their inten-
tions and course of action.
13. The wives of the other two technicians have been told what
has happened and are being contacted at least once daily by TSD
staffers and their wives who have been briefed on the situation. A
conference with the two wives was held in TSD on 19 September to go
over the whole situation and determine if there were any personal.
problems on which the Agency could be of help. For the time being
the wives are telling their neighbors that their husbands are on a
trip. This story will be adjusted depending on what course of action.
the Cuban Government takes, whether the aliases remain unbroken
and whether recognizable photographs of the individuals are released.
to the press. The two wives so far have taken the bad news exceedingly
well..
Distribution:
ADCI - 2
DCI.1
DD/P - 1
COPS - 1
WH 3
3
05 - 1
CI-
RUDOLPH E. GOMEZ
Acting Chief, WH
S-E-C-R-E-T

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
ES
S-E-C-R-E-T
- 3 -
D. Det. 1. furnish 1 C-54 and crew in steudby capacity until
further notice. Stan by capecity is heroin defined as espability to
position the eircraft at any port of entry in east, south or suthwest
U. S. from Easton to Los Angeles within 15 heurs.
E. Accurring the subjects will be released in Havana or Mexico
City, Bet, 1 will prepare mission folders for flights from most
probable porte of entry to Isolation and Andrews Air Ferree Base.
Distribution:
Orig. & 1
3
88
CI Staff
3
OP
3
1
MS
3 - C/FE
3 - C/TSD
CCG
hmmmmmmmm
3
3 TFW
3 - C/WH
DPD/DDR
RICHARD I. SKINNER
--

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
666
RELEASE CONTINCENCY OPLAY 62-2
LAL DD/?
CCC
1134
K
CHART OR MAY REFERENCE:
Sectional scrocautical tharts
As required.
Att
TASK ORGANIZATION:
Det. 1, 1045th Operational Evaluation and Training Gr. Major
Billy B. Campbell, Commander.
1. SITUATION:
Daniel L. Curswell (line), Rates H. Dembrunt (Aliss) and Edward
R. Taransky (Alius) are Taployees who were expretonded by
Cuban authorities in September 1950 and who are un serving ten year seuten-
Since their release
Ceß. Efforts are being made to soure, their release.
may comur vithout advance notice at a variety of plass, is. HavCZE,
Minni, Mexico City, Switzerland, ali, ate., it is deportive that a
contingency plan be formulated to easure the suture reception of these
employees.
The controlling factor in all phase of the release procedure is
that these employees were in Lube der alis and lost during the entire
period Blace their oppture their ander stories apparently
have been intuivel, There ore is essential that there lines by
maintained until such time as the phoned to Ageuey dat
trol and then have these line otur as quickly se pustie
oa
ble.
di
**
For planning purposes the pot will be Ice, Mexico
Be polite
City or "Other areas".
2.
MISSION:
Det. 1, 1045th Operational Eluation and Tresaing Group provide
black pir transportation on port of wizy CO to the designated suike
trei,
3. EXSOUTICK:
£.. Black air spot will provided mater has plus at the
request of TIM, CCS Vexigo, Optical Huppari Myteter/(S/DDS
Dydetox/(S/306
pending on the release pofit ami port of only,

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
(«
S-E-C-R-E-T-
4. As an additional security precaution to provide a safe
haven, and after consultation with the Acting Chief of Station, a key
to an apartment in the same building leased by Mrs. Marjorie
Lennox, an Embassy secretary, was obtained. Mrs. Lennox was
told that “access to her apartment was needed for photographic
surveillance purposes.
5. The Station was then faced with the probability that time
and security would work against holding indefinitely the lease to
the apartment over NCNA since the owners of the building were
cancelling sub-lessors' contracts and recalling leases. It was,
therefore, decided to install transmitters and switches in order to
permit continued monitoring of the target from a distant listening
post. Another three -man team of TSD technicians consisting of
David L. Christ (alias Carswell), Walter E. Szuminski (alias
Taransky) and Thornton J. Anderson (alias Danbrunt) documented
to
as tourists had been sent to Havana to install audio equipment in the
Chinese Nationalist Embassy before it was due to be turned over
the Chinese Communits. This operation aborted. This team was
then sent to work on the installation of the transmitters in the apart-
ment over the NCNA office.
.
6. At 2400 hours on 14 September, Christ, who with the
other technicians was working in the target apartment, failed to keep
a scheduled appointment with Neet. At 0100 hours on the 15th of
September, the apartment of Mrs. Lennox was entered into and
searched by Cuban authorities, and she was taken into custody. At
1540 hours' on 15 September, Neet, the stay-behind agent and his wife⠀⠀
were picked up by the Cuban authorities and detained.
7. As of today the agent remains in the custody of the Cuban
authorities. His wife has been released and is still in Havana. Neet
was released 1715 hours 16 September and has subsequently returned.
to Washington where he is being debriefed. Mrs. Lennox was
subsequently released and has also returned to Washington where she
is being debriefed, The three TSD technicians remain in confinement,
They have been seen in confinement but not contacted by an Embassy
officer when ha first attempted to secure the release of Mrs. Lennox.
Christ was last seen by Neet when they were jointly interrogated
the morning of 16 September. At that time Christ did not appear
-3-
S-E-C-R-E-T

--- Image 104-10095-10276_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
Ca
S-E-C-R-E-T
to have been maltreated.
8. According to articles in the Cuban papers the three
technicians were arrested while in the apartment over the NCNA
office and completing the installation of the equipment. The
press article adds that the key to Mrs, Lennox's apartment was
found on one of the technicians who identified the apartment to
which it belonged. All Cuban press releases have referred to the
men by alias and have not identified them as Government or Agency
employees. It is unclear at present what story had been agreed
upon by the technicians and station personnel to be used in the event
they were caught. (While being interrogated with Neet, Christ
indicated that Neet was his boss, and Neet consistently denied any.
knowledge as to why he was being held.) The sub-lease for the
apartment in which the men were caught is in the name of the stay-
behind agent with the original lease being in the name of Mills, the
FE Division Case Officer.
9. Initial information indicated that the three technicians would
be charged with espionage "against the people of China". Subsequent
preas releases have been unclear on this point. An attempt by Consul
Hugh Kessler to contact the three men at 1730 hours on 17 September
was unsuccessful. He was not permitted to see them but was told
they were in custody,
--
10. The three technicians travelled to Cuba as tourists under
very light commercial cover, two of them working for a company in
New York and the third, one in Baltimore. In each case the cover
company consists of a telephone answering service and a name on the
door. Telephone messages and mail are picked up periodically by an
Agency contract employee. The men were provided with this cover
as well as unbackstopped home addresses for use when entering or
leaving-Ćuba as tourists since the filling out of the landing card
requires this information. Subsequent to their detention the home
addresses have been partially backstopped so that inquiries will
indicate that someone with this alias name had lived in the apartment
house in question. Insofar as the cover companies are concerned,
efforts are being made to provide a backstop to withstand inquiries
from the press should the Cubans reveal this information. In view
-3-