

--- Image 104-10171-10047_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10171-10047
:
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
2P
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
PROCESSING
10
DISPATCH
Acting Chief, WE
CLASSIFICATION:
SECRET
ACTAN
ACCOM
PUSHED
PHD
POSED
FOR INSERING
}
:
:
INFO.
Chief, Task Force W
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, Madrid M
021-YEB/PRRUZEN.
Resistanca Activity in Cuba:
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION: FYI
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADKARTERS DESA
CAN ATASEVING
ABSTRACT
The following information was provided by Francisco Luis Rodrigues
Conzales (CC-1169), a Cuban refugee who arrived in Spain in early August
1962 and had been active in the Revolutionary Student Directorate, an
anti-Government resistance group, while in Cuba.
1
a. Source has been opposed to the Castro regime ever since the defection of
Diaz Lanz in May 1959, and was involved in sabotage activity with the
Revolutionary Student Directorate. His immediate supervisor was Angel 06
Fontanills, known as "Charles" in clandestine circles. Alberto fuller,
the leader of this group, arrived clandestinely in Cuba in October or
November 1960 and began to organize the various groups of Directorate to
bring about an insurrection in the Sierra Maestra area, in Oriente Province.
These groups were mainly from the provinced of Las Villas and Havana, and
received orders to unite with Muller who was already in the Sieyra Maestra.
The men went there in small groups, and had the seminary in the Santuario
del Cobre as their destination. Once in that spot, they received final
instructions and military equipment. Source's group, which consisted of two
carloads, entered the Sierra Maestra through Bayamo. Source was riding in
the first car. When they arrived on the outskirts of Bayamo, source's car
was stopped by the militia, but the car was allowed to pass without any
check. A few minutes later they realized that they were being followed and
tried to escape. An alarm and shots went up, and they were finally captured
and taken prisoner. The second car, which was following close behind them
and was warned by the shots, was able to escape.
b. The prisoners were taken first to C-2 Headquarters in Santiago de Cuba and
later to the Boniato Prison, where they were interrogated by the G-2.
There were two American prisoners there, and although source did not know
their names, he said that they were from the Quantanamo Naval Base.
c. Muller was taken prisoner a few days later (shortly after the ill-fated
invasion of Flaya Giron). No arms were taken from him when he was arrested.
Had this insurrection been successful, about 1,000 men would have risen up.
hemal
D19-9-9
CROSS REFERENCE
OS COM
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
19-120-19
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
31 August '62 31 August 162
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
OSHA-14,272
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
65-6-33/4
31BR

--- Image 104-10171-10047_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
Spray
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
DISPATCM SYMIYA ANG NUMBER
SECRET
OSLA-14,272
d. Of the Buller group, which was called the "127", about 20 prisoners were
taken, five of whom, including source, were set free. One of these was
an infiltrator called Flores, whom no one trusted since they knew that
he was not "one of the group.". Another of these was Rolando Valdés
D'Wolf who is now in prison in the Fortaleza de la Cabaña serving a nine-
year sentence. He was captured trying to escape in a car belonging to a
militiaman and wearing a militia uniform. He defended himself bravely, but
received five bullet wounds which incapacitated him. The other two who
were released were Eduardo Díaz Lanz and Jorge Cruz Peña, a sergeant in
the Rebel Army who was with Castro in the Sierra. The latter had actually
not been involved in the group. Source thought that he (source) and Diaz
Lanz were released so that they might be followed and lead the Government
to other groups and individuals in Havana who might be involved in
resistance activity. Source had been in prison six months before being
released, and one thing which he could not explain was that on the paper
that he was given which indicated his release, no mention was made of any
sentence or penalty.
:
e. On several occasions, Muller had been subjected to false execution
procedures, with the purpose of trying to make him talk, but he did not.
weaken. During the trial, "everyone remained firm," and zource was told
that Huller was very bravo in his pronouncements against the Regime and,
at every moment, abided by his principles. He presented a very brilliant
self-defense..
f. When source was in the Boniato prison, he shared a cell with a Captain
Anibal Rodriguez, who belonged to the MHR. This officer, along with other
rebel officers and soldiers, had staged an uprising in Imias, in Oriente
Province. Later he was sentenced to death and shot.
g. During his last days in Cuba, source avoided all revolutionary activity,
since he wanted to leave Cuba more than anything else. However he knew
that the various resistance groups worked hard, carrying out a great deal ·
of independent sabotage activity, although there was not much coordination
among the various movements. One movement which had a large membership,
especially in Oriente Province, was the N-30-11. This group was planning to
launch an insurrection in Pinar del Rio in January 1962, but they could
not carry it out since the repression in the area was so great..
•
h. Hans, a member of the Revolutionary Student Directorate, was recently
taken prisoner, and it seemed that he was tortured a great deal and
talked. As a result of this, a house in Wajey, in Havana Province, was
seized and arms and gelatina were found. The owners of the house and other
persons were arrested.
Attachments Spanish report
Distributions
-
1
2 - AC/WE, w/att.
2
G
C/TW
Helen
Caporla
Helen B. Caporla