

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_1.jpeg ---
104-10103-10079
14-00000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET - SENSITIVE
Draft Memorandum to the DCI from William Harvey
Dated 27 November 1962
This is not a controlled item
:
Į

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐
particularly Cuban seamen, to increase the twenty
officers and crew members aboard six Cuban vessels we are
now running as controlled agents.
6. Penetration of Cuban Installations Abroad: At
the present time we are running 12 Cuben diplomats
stationed outside Cube as controlled agents and have viable
operations aimed at an additional 20 Cuban diplomats.
We propose to continue and intensify the current program
of attempting to recruit or defect every Cuben official
representative abroad to whom we can gain access end
concerning whom we have any reason to believe a
susceptibility to approach exists. These additions l
penetrations will be attempted both through unilateral
operations and where appropriate in conjunction with
{liaison services. }
7. Audio Penetrations of Cuban Installations
Abroad: At the present time we have audio and/or
telephone tap coverage of Cuban officiel installations
in Chile, Italy, Mexico, The Netherlands, England,
Uruguay, Greece, Spain, France, and Canada. No
major expansion of this coverage is presently
contemplated, but we will continue to survey additions 1
targets of opportunity and wherever possible install
coverage in those cases where the additional intelli-
gence from this type of source over and above what we
are now receiving would appear to make such installation
1. worthwhile.
-8-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
a.
Communications Intelligence: We will continue
our present CIA Close Support coverage from the KOLA
station in Miamb at the same level and will continue
to press NSA for additional coverage of Cuban communion-
tions. As the current situation "normalizes" it should
be possible for NSA to reinstitute and perhaps even
increase their seaborne intercept coverage of Cuban
communications.
9. Communist Party Operations: A complete survey
has been made world-wide of all Communist Party
penetration operations and wherever any such penetration
can be directed against Cuba either by dispatching the
sgent to Cuba or by pointing the agent against Cuban
targets, this will be done, except in those cases where
such action would result in unacceptable prejudice to
the operations in the area where the agent is now based.
It is believed that the most lucrative field for the
redirection of such operations to the Cuban target will
be Latin America where there are 65 penetrations of
various communist parties. Of this 65, the survey
we have conducted indicates that 23 have some direct
pertinent access to Cuban targets. All of these 23 will
be directed against these targets unless in any case
there are overriding reasons to the contrary. The
remaining cases in the total of 65 are bein individually
examined to see if they can be diverted to Cuban tørġets.
-10-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
N
•
10. Illegally Infiltrated Agents: The two
successful black infiltrated teams (COBRA and AMTORRID)
which have produced substantial intelligence will be
continued, resupplied, and reinforced but pointed
primarily at continued intelligence collection and at
the recruitment for intelligence collection purposes of
other Cubans who already are legally resident in Cuba
in the areas where the teams are operating (Pinar del
Rio and Oriente). In addition, on the most carefully
selected basis, where it appears feasible, additional
agents and teams will be infiltrated black into Cuba
in an effort to duplicate the performance of the COBRA
and AMTORRID teams and particularly to recruit and, as
possible, train additional agents legally resident in
Cuba.
11. Exfiltration: As feasible, agents and potential
recruits now in Cuba will be exfiltrated for
training, indoctrination, supplying with communications,
They will then be re-infiltrated into
and motivation.
Cuba, primarily on intelligence missions. Where possible,
this will be done through legal travel channels, but
where this is not possible, it will be done wherever
feasible through our black infiltration-exfiltration
facilities, primarily our maritime assets.
-11-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
Paramilitary, Commando, and Guerrille Type Operations:
Given the assumptions in Paragraph I above, no wide scale
program of such activity should be undertaken. However, we
propose to maintain in being our present facilities and
the capability of undertaking such operations in order to
fully exploit any substantial change in internal Cuban con-
ditions or any substantial revolt or uprising which might occur.
Economic Warfare: It is proposed to continue and
B.
intensify the program already undertaken to deny through
clandestine and covert means critical materials to the Cuben
economy. This consists primarily of denial operations, possibly
some preclusive buying and inducing friendly U.S. and allied
firms and governments to prevent the shipments of strategic
materials to Cuba.
Counterintelligence:
i
.F.
The current counterintelligence
and counterespionage program against the Cuban G-2 and
related services will be continued and as possible intensified.
This program has developed substantially and it should be
possible within the coming months to increase its effectiveness
considerably in countering not only Cuban but Bloc intellt-
gence operations mounted against United States interests
from Cuba.
G. Political Action, Propaganda, Psychological Warfare:
In this field the following tasks will be continued and where
appropriate intensified:
1.
Assist and support State in any feasible action.
-13-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Floquet
B. Much of the above effort as noted will be primarily
directed towards developing all possible evidences of stress
or strain within the regime and between the regime and other
nations, particularly the Bloc. An intensive program will
be continued to take advantage of any possible opportunity
to weaken, subvert, or split the regime in any possible
fashion. This is basically a long term effort.
long term effort. A great deal
of work already has gone into this and the current
status of this program and the proposed further expldtation
of the numerous leads we have developed is being made, in
the interests of brevity in this memorandum, the subject of
a separate compilation. The effectiveness of assets aimed st
actually splitting the regime, i.e., a palace revolt, will of
course depend, to an extent, on the willingness of the United
States Government to support them and it is entirely possible
that any such effort might fail unless supported with military
forces which on the basis of the assumptions in Paragraph I
above would appear unlikely.
C. Sabotage: On the basis of the assumptions set out.
above, commando type sabotage, minor sabotage, and other
acts of sabotage inside Cuba would appear to serve little
purpose and should not be undertaken except in the rare
instances where an opportunity is presented with acceptable
risk to do major damage to the Cuban economy. It is proposed
to continue searching for such limited opportunities, but
no active or wide scale program is contemplated.
-12-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_17.jpeg ---
A
14-00000
:
A.
A gradual but substantial reduction in the expenditures
and personnel of Task Force W.
B. Consideration of the re-positioning of Task Force W
within the Clandestine Service, possibly as a major component
of the WH Division under different direction.
C. The abolition of the operational Mongoose mechanism,
D. The removal of the past framework which required
detailed consideration by the Special Group (Augmented) of
even minor operational details and decision by committee on
points which it is believed are completely within the purview
of the DCI and those officers to whom he delegates decision.
V. RECOMMENDED ACTION:
A. Your concurrence in the above general operational plan
is recommended.
B. It is recommended that you discuss this plan with
the Special Group (Augmented) and secure its concurrence.
c. It is recommended that you secure from the Special
Group (Augmented) policy approval to attempt to induce ran
American Airways and KLM to resume their flights between Miami.
and Havana at the appropriate time.
D. It is recommended that if any "Track Two" concept
is proposed, you endeavor to transfer to the Department of
State all possible overt aspects of this type of uncontrolled
-16-
:

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
to develop and exploit current OAS and Latin Americrn
attitudes favorable to the containment and/or overthrow
of the Castro-communist regime.
2, Assist State in the development of post-Castro
concepts, leaders, and political groups.
3. Stimulate, support and guide covertly the
propaganda and political action activities of the CRC
and other Cuban political groups and individuals, is
appropriate, who offer a potential for impact inside
Cuba.
Develop, maintain and exploit the will of the
Cuban people to resist Castro-communism, making maximum
use of the downgrading of Castro and his regime during
the missile crisis.
5. Discredit and ridicule Castro and his regime
in Cuba, in the Hemisphere and elsewhere, with emphasis
on the theme the missile crisis demonstrated con-
clusively that Castro is nothing but a mere pawn of
Soviet imperialism.
6. Continue "Radio Americas" and other CIA-
sponsored Cuban exile radio broadcasts as appropriate.
7. Launch propaganda balloons after an operational
capability has been established and policy authority is
granted to conduct propaganda balloon operations.
8. Continue the infiltration of propaganda materinl
into Cuba via open mails, legal travellers and couriers,
with special emphasis on selective black operations.
-14-
1

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
subsidy and support of Cuban exile groups.
B. It is recommended that the Mongoose operational
mechanism be abolished.
If you concur in this concept, specific recommendations
will be made to you concerning the re-positioning of Task Force
W within the DD/P.
:
-17-
WILLIAM K. HARVEY
Chief, Task Force W
444
:

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
H. Exploitation of Exile Groups: We will continue
the clandestine exploitation of exile groups for intelligence
collection, psychological warfare and other approved missions.
As feasible, we will act to mount as much of this effort es
possible from areas outside the continental United States, and
particularly from Latin America. If Higher Authority decides
on a "Track Two" concept or on any similar concept which
contemplates heavy uncontrolled and only generally directed
action operations of Cuban groups against Cubs, it is believed
that efforts should be made to transfer as much as possible
of the responsibility for this non-clandestine, non-intelligence
type operation into the political field, which is the province
of the Department of State. In this connection, it is believed
it would be advisable to press for the creation within the
Department of State of an office of Cuban Exile Affairs to
handle the overt government relationships with Cuban exile
groups.
IV. ORGANIZATIONAL AND PROCEDURAL CHANGES:
Maximum implementation of the above plan which provides
for the most intensive feasible collection of intelligence,
the implementation of related programs as outlined, and the
maintenance of capabilities to exploit targets of opportunity
as well as take advantage of any future substantial changes
in internal Cuban conditions will, it is believed, permit
and make advisable the following:
I
-15-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
****
!
.:.
Draftin
23 Nov. 1962
SECRET
SENSITIVE
OFERATIONAL PLAN - CIMA
1. SITUATION:
A. The purpose of this plan is to outline the action to be
undertaken by the Central Intelligence Agency against the Castro/
overnment of Cuba during IT-63 and for such langer
Commmiar
period
are made;
directed.
For the purpose of this plan the following assumptica
Nationa
ional objectives
essentially
follow
Isolate Castro/Commm
from other Western
Hemisphere nations
ther
Discredit the Castro/ Communist regime in Cuba
in the Hemisphere
laintat
-
mie and political pressuro
the Castro/Co
regime
gime to retard develup-
i
THIS DOCUMENT IS
A SOURCE REFERENCE
IN CS HISTORICAL -
PAPER NO.
-DO NOT DESTROY
ment of the Cuba economy and maintain a drain
on Bles resources,
d. Maintain maximum coverage of Cuban intelligere
requirements.
Be prepared to capitalise on any significant
uprising, split in Cuban ** MiPTUAN
SECRET
SENSITIVE
GROUP
Excluded fram automatic
igrading and a
sification
or split

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
R
BECRET – SENSITIVE
T
27 November 1962
Note:
Discussed 27 November
1962 by DD/F with DGI
end approved generally
in principle by ECI.
Fully concurred in
by DD/P.
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence
THROUGH:
SUBJECT:
Deputy Director (Plans)
Operational Plen for Continuing
Operations Against Cubɛ
1. Action: This memorandum is for your information
and pursuant to your request. Recommendations for action pre
contained in Paragraph V below. The purpose of this memOVEDÉU A
is to delineate an operational plan for the action which we
believe should be taken by CIA against Cubs for the predictable
future. In summary the plan provides for continuing, even
intensifying, the intelligence effort against Cuba and for
the reorientation of the current effort into a long tera
denied area type of operation of the highest priority.
.I.
ASSUMPTIONS:
A. The United States Government will give public
assurances that, provided no nuclear or offensive weapons pro
present or re-introduced into Cuba, and provided Cubi does
not take action to threaten the peace and security of the
Western Hemisphere, the United States does not
invæde Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba.
SECRET
SENSITIVE
intend to
THIS DOCUMENT IS
A SCURCE I
IN CS MINE
PAPER NO.
-DO NOT DESTROY.
W
i
'

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_22.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
2.
'I
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
resistance group or uprising.
grø
Be prepared to support approved U. S. military plant
against Cubs.
IV. INLDSENTATION:
to daysle
:
To undertake the above-listed tasks, CIA would be required
following pros
Intelligence (Ft)/Co
Intelligence
The past build-up of intelligenon assets must be
intensified and expanded, The following types of notions
will be maximized;
Spotting/recruiting/training of legally matoblichot
Cubans in Cuba
Amme-ponts “Mend
Establishment and maintenance of reliable, as
commmmications will become more critical es pelice
state controls increase
Spotting / recourting/training Cutsar, in Gover
+
43 Spotting/recruiting/training of third country
23
nationals resident in Cuba.
31 Spotting/recruiting/training of legal travelera
41
who have potential access to significant information
or who can provide significant operational support,
Expansion of commmications intelligence partienter
ly in tha G-2, police, and militia nats. (Thin
is primartly on HA-problem,)
SEGNET
SENSITIVE
GROUP 1
Excluded frn automatic
4
dow racing and
CH

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
SENSITIVE
amounts of equipment,
2. Maintain sufficient covert assets to meet raquli s
ments levied on CIA in approved U. S. Military
contingency plans. Where internal assets are
not available, assets may be held externally.
SUFYORK REQUIRED FROM OTHER AGENCIKS:
Kone
VI. ESTIMATED COST TO CIAL
A. Personnal
3. Estimated Budget
63
rx 64
i
AND SECRET
SENSITIVE
GROUP 1
Excluded from automalle

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
d
1
II. MISSION:
H SEGRET
SUISITIVE
-2-
on Cuban-Bloc relationships.
Covertly support the above-cited U. s. national
objectives with respect to Cuba.
III. TARKSI
Intelligence Cou
Tentelligenc
Crha
1. Provide the maximum intelligence coverage of Cube
with particular emphasis on the following:
Capabilities and intentions of the Castro
gov
Activities of Cuban 0-2.
Soviet activities in Cuba,
State of resistance including the tone and
temper of the population.
Military and militia order of battle.
Locus of power and/or stress and strain ora
the "power centers" in the Cuban governsent.
Soviet/Cuban and Chinese/Coben relationships.
h. Economic
Political:
1. Assist and support State in any feasible action to
develop active OAS and Latin-American country support
for the containment, er overthrow of Castro.
SECRET
SENSITIVE
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
B.
These assurances will preclude any meaningful CIA
action on a phased basis to provoke a revolt inside Cuba, since
unless there are major changes in operational and internal con-
ditions in Cuba, such a revolt if provoked would be totally
destroyed by Cuban counteraction in a matter of hours or, at
the most few days unless supported by a major United States
Military commitment. In addition, the non-invasion assurances
as a practical matter will preclude invading Cuba on the pretext
of a contrived provocation such as an attack on Guantanamo.
CIA operations involving a high noise level and a
distinct element of attributability, particularly paramilitary,
guerrilla, and commando type operations will be unacceptable
as a matter of policy.
D. The Castro-communist regime will remain in power for
; the indefinite future with its security and control apparatus
relatively intact and with the capability not only of crushing
unsupported resistance activity, but of making operational
conditions in Cuba increasingly difficult. While it is
possible that recent and future developments including the
Soviet action in removing the offensive weapons from Cuba may
serve to weaken and discredit Castro, there is as yet no hard
indication that the control of the Castro-communist regime over
Cuba has been substantially weakened.
E The United States assurances of no invasion and no
support of an invasion will, in effect, constitute giving to
Castro and his regime a certain degree of sanctuary. This will
In
-2-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
{
3½
LOD SECRET
SENSITIVE
3 Maintain refuges debriefing programs.
7. Maximize utilization of liaison services for above progr
B. Peychological Warfare (CA):
The program must primarily consentrate on and
resob the Cuban population. The following psychological
warfare activities are considered essential:
▲ propaganda balloon Launching capability and
opriate policy authority to conduct provegnodo
balloon launching operations.
;
2.
Continua and expand the present^ propaganda
operations infiltrating material into Coba sta
via
the open mails legal travelers, or couriers.
Continus propaganda activities, utilizing political
progessional, cultural, student, and other gree
groups
which have a potential for getting their mag
to their counterparts inside of Cuba.
Faramil
smilitary
The program will be basically for developing and
maintaining a minima stand-by capability for was in the
event of a significant up-rising or in the event of
implementation of U. S. Military plans.
The following program is considered essentiall
1. Maintain the capability to infiltrate/exfiltrate
limited bere ne personal and/or Lifted
THE SECRET
+
SENSITIVE
GROUP 1
F1 from automatic)
do ngrading and
jessication

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SENSITIVE
Assist State in
(post-Castro
concepts, leaders, and political groups
Previda covert
and to such other
seeh
Cuban political growns
appropriate
Develop centrs
contactar
Spower
cente
ers" of the Cuben
pitting the
Economies
!
1. Participate in inter-agency economic action planning
md
*** and execution.
Prevent essential material and supplies from reaching
Cuba
Harass Free World Trade with
th Guba
Bayshologicals
Day
aintain
exploi
loit the will of the Cuben
pe
to resist Castro/Ca
Commmin.
Discredit the Castre resing
in the Emisphere
and elsewhere.
3. Develop and exploit tensions between Cuba and Sevier
blea members.
B.
Resistance
Be prepared to covertly provide limited personal
HORŐSECRET®
SENSITIVE
support any significant internet
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
severely damage the morale and motivation of anti-regime Cubens
both inside and outside of Cuba, which will make it increasingly
difficult for us to recruit agents, maintain agents already
recruited, and continue or intensify our intelligence and other
efforts against Cuba and the Castro-communist regime.
Despite the above factoss, Higher Authority probably
will continue heavy press on the CIA for maximum effort
against Cuba and may even continue to contend that the ultimate
objective is the overthrow of the Castro-communist regime'.
This is an unrealistic objective, however, except on a very
long-term basis as the United States Government, we believe,
will be unwilling in the immediate future to commit troops
to support such an overthrow. The United States Government
in its overt dealings with the Cuban exiles probably will not
express the above factors to them in the context or with the
bluntness stated here.
G. In view of these factors, the so-called "Track Two",
course of action, i.e., unlimited support of Cuban exiles
and exile groups with no real control or objective purposes
in the hope that these groups will be able to shake the
Castro regime will, although unrealistic, become increasingly
attractive at various levels in the United States Government.
H. As a matter of policy, political pressures and
economic pressures short of blockade, raids, and aggressive
sabotage against Cuba will be continued.
-3-

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
A
I.
In view of the above assumptions paramilitary, commando
and sabotage operations, except in rare selective instances
will serve little purpose; also they will be counter-productive
since, if undertaken, they will make the collection of intelli-
gence more difficult and should only be undertaken in those very
few instances where an unusually high return can be demonstrated.
Regardless of what other pressures are placed on CIA for
action against Cuba, it would appear clear that Higher Authority
will insist on a continued, even intensified, intelligence
coverage of Cuba.
J. In view of the policy factors, an increased use of
facilities, real estate and basing outside the United States,
particularly in Latin America, will be both necessary and
desirable.
i
K. Adequate aerial reconnaissance of Cuba will continue.
fI. OBJECTIVES:
Based on the above assumptions, the following objectives
appear to be proper for continuing CIA operations against
Cuba:
:
A. Take all feasible clandestine action to isolate
and assist in isolating the Castro-communist regime in Cuba
from the rest of the Western Hemisphere and the rest of the
Free World.
B. To the maximum extent possible, discredit the Castro-
communist regime in Cuba and in the Western Hemisphere and the
rest of the world.

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
E. Tako maximum action to induce a split in the Cuban
regime and maintain the capability of capitalizing immediately
through clandestine means to the extent possible on any
significant uprising, revolt, resistance, split in the regime,
or strains and stresses among Cuban leadership or in Cuban/
Bloc relationships.
III.
OPERATIONAL PLAN:
-
A. Espionage and Intelligence Collection All feasible
effort should be undertaken to continue and intensify intelli-
gence collection concerning Cuba. The status of our intelli-
gence collection and related operational activity at the
present time and its development during the past six months
is delineated in detail in Attachment A, which was prepared to
serve as the basis for the IG's report on this particular
matter to the President's Board of Consultants on Foreign
Intelligence. You will note that this lengthy document
breaks down under numerous sub-headings the intelligence
coverage which has been developed by the Clandestine Service.
Set out below are specifics of operational action it is
proposed to take to continue and, as possible, increase in-
telligence coverage of Cubs.
1. Intelligence Exploitation of Refugees: As you
know, with the quarantine and the cessation of air
travel the heavy' flow of Cuban refugees has dwindled
lmost to nothing. In view of this and in connection
-8

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
with the contingency planning for supporting any possible
military action in Cuba, the Opa-Locks Interrogation
Center as such was dismantled, although the personnel
of the Center have been retained intact. In order to
re-establish the flow of intelligence from refugees,
it is proposed that Pan American Airways and KLM be
induced to reinstitute their regular flights from
Havana to Miami. This should be done as soon as
possible after the settlement of the current negotiations
and UN discussions. Coincident with this, the Opa-Locka
refugee interrogation center will be re-established
with the same personnel.
2.
Resident Agents in Cuba: Every effort will be
made to continue to exploit to the fullest, preserve the
viability of and, where necessary, re-establish communica-
tions with the 131 recruited agents now resident in Cuba.
To an extent, the speed and effectiveness of this effort
will of course depend upon the stringency of future
Cuban security and control action, which it is impossible
as yet to accurately forecast.
3. Third Country Operations:
The priority on re-
cruiting agents in third countries for dispatch to Cuba
will be reiterated and strengthened and every effort
will be made to increase this coverage, both through
the development of additional resident agents in Cuba
-7-
:

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
and through the development of additional legal travellers.
We will continue to press
Liaison Operations:
the Finison services who are assisting us in the effort
against Cuba for additional coverage, including the
recruiting of agents within their own areas for joint
dispatch to Cuba. The services most effectively co-
operating at this point in this connection are the
British, Dutch, French, Spanish, Italian, Greek,
Norwegian, Danish, West German, Mexican, Argentinian,
Uruguayan, Canadian, Chilean, and Israell Direct
approaches to several of these services either by you
personally or in your name, as you prefer, are
being separately recommended. Personal representation
by you to the services underlined above would be useful.
In addition, we will re-survey all other liaison services
with which we are in contact and reiterate to those
appearing to have any assets usable against Cuba our
extreme interest in maximum coverage of this problem.
In connection with the Hinson problem generally, we will
endeavor to induce all of the Maison services to make
greater use of their national assets, both inside and
outside of Cuba. Particular attention will be given to
possible utilization of the Vatican.
5. Maritime Operations: In addition to increasing
efforts to get at seaman agents and other maritime
assets through Liaison services, we will continue our
unilateral third country efforts to recruit seamen and
1.
Q

--- Image 104-10103-10079_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
C. Maintain through clandestine means, short of commando
and guerrilla type operations, the maximum economic and
political pressures on the Cuban regime and economy nöt only
for the purpose of hampering the Cuban regime, but for the
additional purpose of insuring the maximum possible drain on
Bloc resources used to support Cuba
D. Maintain maximum possible intelligence and counter-
intelligence coverage of Cuba, including particular emphasis
on:
secur abilities and intentions of the government.
2
Activities of the Cuban G-2 and its other
organs.
3. Soviet and Bloc activities in Cuba.
State of potential resistance, including the
morale and temper of the populace.
ment.
Militia and military order of battle and equip-
☐ 6. The loci of power and of possible stresses
and strains in the power centers in the Cuban government,
· 7. Relationships between Cuba, USSR, Red China,
the Bloc, Latin American nations and other Free World
and uncommitted nations.
8. The level of and the weaknesses in the Cuban
economy
— 5