

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10119-10182
I
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
16 February 1970
MEMORANDUM FOR
Director of Security
SUBJECT
Comments on Manuscript Give Us This Day;
CIA and the Bay of Pigs Invasion by Edward J.
Hamilton
1. This manuscript has evidently been kicking around in publishing
circles since at least mid-1968, presumably without CIA clearance.
William Buckley of the National Review seems to have been "shopping" it
at one point. One publisher rejected it as too "controversial", and noted
its "confidential" nature as well as its potential for libel suits.
2. In the foreword to this manuscript, the author (whom I shall
refer to under his assumed name of Hamilton), describes the book as a
"personal account" of CIA's role in the Bay of Pigs affair in which he was
■ sentor CIA participant for 19 months. He notes in the foreword his hope
that someone would have written this book so that he would not have to do
it; now convinced that, if he does not write it, it will never be written,
he has taken up his pen "reluctantly and in a mood of nostalgic bitterness.
Hamilton states that he has used no official files or documents and has
onsulted no one in preparing this work. Where true names are used in
the manuscript for CIA personnel, he writes that they have been publicly
Identified before, and in this contention I believe that he is correct, with
the possible exception of Jim Noel. The author's claim that this book
would provide no information not known to Castro's intelligence service,
or that details this late are of no value to the opposition,is, in my view,
seriously open to question.
3. The book is, in general,favorable to CIA actions in the Bay of
The villains of the piece are certain liberal figures in the Kennedy
Administration (Schlesinger, Goodwin, Stevenson) and to some extent,
the President himself. In his concluding chapter, the author's bitterness
is undisguised against those in the Administration and the press who took
the opportunity of the Bay of Pigs incident to attack and denigrate CIA.
4. Messrs. Bissell and Barnes and the author's other CIA co-
workers in the Cuban Project, by and large, are given quite favorable
treatment. One exception is General Cabell, whom the author excoriates,
and it is apparent that Hamilton's opinion of Jerry Droller is far from
EYES CULLY
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproducë
"/JD

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
M
Chapter VI
„1. "This chapter relates Hamilton's touchy visit, with some members
the Frente, to the Guatemala training bases.
ining bases. Their breakfast conver
tions with President Ydigoras are described. .This breakfast gives the author
chance to reflect back on the CIA role in the overthrow of Cuatemalan
President Arbens. He recalls the three exiled leaders of Quatemala, his
own support for Dr. Cordova to head the new government, and State's vete
of Cal. Ydigoras as "vaguely authoritarian." At a crucial moment, however
Dr. Cordova had to undergo cancer surgery and therefore could not be selected;
the choice fell on Castillo Armas. New Ydigoras was President but
sequently overthrown because he had done so much for the U.S.
Cuba (pp. 119-122).
273741
2. Bob Davis, the CIA Chief in Guatemala, is mentioned as a partici-
pant in the breakfast with Ydigoras. [Davis' name has been published
previously.)
3. At the Guatemalan training site, Hamilton refers to being greated
" In a
there by an American Army Lt. Colonel whose name was "Frank.
footnote, Harvillton adds that this officer had been detailed to CIA for the
Project, and that "Credible allegations of his actions during the invasion
strongly suggest that he was to some extent mentally unbalanced" (p. 124).
Hostile conversations between Hamilton and "Frank”, as well as the initial
unfortunate polemics of Frente chief Tony Varona, are described.
The presence of Green Berets to help in the training of the
Brigade is noted. Colonel Lake's presence and parachute training is again
mentioned (pp. 135-136).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
I los

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
Chapter VI
1. In this chapter Hamilton levels some criticism at Ambassador
Bonsal, whom he describes as ineffectual and whom he calls "fumbling
Phil" (pp. 94-95)
03
2. Hamilton describes Jim Noel's arrival at the Miami Base, fol-
lowing the severing of diplomatic relations with Cuba, as "unwelcome",
because he felt him to be "basically either soft on Communism or at least
terribly confused about the issues. (p. 96). Hamilton offers his criticism
of Manual (Manole) Ray because the latter had stayed with Castro too long
and was a
now sounding a theme
revolution betrayed" which was find-
For at
and CIA.
at the White House,
SECRET
EYES ONLY
100

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_14.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
EYES ONLY
12
Chapter X
This chapter opens with an unsuccessful internal revolt again:
President Ydigoras in Guatemala and indicates the desire of the Cuban
Trente and some of the Cuban Brigade in Guatemala to come to his nusis
tance. Hamilton relayed this request to Washington, where it was considered
by Bender, Barnes and Bissell, and presumably higher levels, and turned
down (p. 180). Ydigoras succeeded in putting down this revolt. "Hamilton
notes that he subsequently learned that several companies of the Brigade
had disobeyed orders, made a show of force at a rebel stronghold and
helped stifle the uprising (p. 182)...
In mid-March 1961 Hamilton was co
per
pletn
to a meeting with Bissell, Barnes, Jake, Mendor and
and Jam
pointed out that the White House wanted a broader base in the
how important it was to the White House to bring Manolo Ray Inte
Hamilton pointed out that the Cubans disliked Ray and that a large
of the Cabans accepted the Frente. [Noel indicated that Ray was not as
as painted, while Hamilton listed the Cuban objections to Ray's progra
of Castroism without Fidal and the length of time it took Ray to become
disillusioned with Castro. Furthermore, Ray's program did not incli
returning to the Cuban Constitution of 1940 which the others all sup
ported (pp. 185-189). As a result of the desire to force Ray into the F
Hamilton resigned his position in Miami and was reassigned.(p. 189).
Noe] and [Carr] replaced him (p. 190).
bad
Jim
54
SEGRET
EYES ONL
&-JD

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
- 11
Chapter IX
sessment
sment team
1. Hamilton states that the Joint Chiefs of Staff
sited the Guatemalan camps and issued an enthusiastic appraisal as to
the Brigade's training and battle readiness (p. 160). The author notes
that this was important in the light of post-invasion attempts by the
Pentagon to play down their role.
In a footnote, Hamilton writes that after the invasion Bender
"was galled" by the fact that the exiles referred to him freely, and usually
in unflattering terms (p. 162). Hamilton also adds that he learned that
in Noel and Will Carr, "Col. King's crony", were becoming increasingi
active among non-Frente Cubans in Washington and New York (p. 163).
This presumably cut across Hamilton's political action lines.]
3. The remainder of the chapter is-largely taken up with discussions
of intra-Frente problems, with a note of the fact that American infiltra-
tion operations into Cuba had virtually ceased because of their lack of
success.
U I A
SECRET
EVES ONLY
2 KTD

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
$10
Chapter VI
VIII
This chapter
lems within the Frente Cribes more conversations regardin
Ray (p. 140-145).
of whose members is trying to bring in Man
2. Hamilton then tells of a meeting with Bissell who said that
under White House pressure to broaden the political base of the Frente
Evidently former Venezualan President Betancourt, former Costa
President Figueres and Puerto Rican Governor Muños Marin were insisting
on the inclusion of Manolo Ray (p. 146). Schlesinger and Goodw
backing Ray. Hamilton mentioned that the Cubans did not like
of the lateness with which he broke from Castro (p. 147). Bissell
that the Joint Chiefs of Staff wished to send an evaluation tea
camps to appraise the state
☐ of readiness (p. 148).
aining
3. Tracy Barnes takes Hamilton to see Schlesinger at the White House
where the latter is working on his famous White Paper on Gaba (p. 151). R
was there that Hamilton learned that Secretary of State Rusk had vetold the
there that Hamilton learned of State Ruek had the
original point of invasion as top "noisy." Ambassador Stevenson joins the
mesting and asks Barnes if everything was going well. Hamilton interprets
`
this remark as indicating that the Ambassador know about the invasion plans,
which the latter had subsequently denied. Hamilton also mentions the fact
before
that Barnes had kept a mamorandum of his briefing of Stevense
invasion (pp. 152-153).
SECRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
EYES ONLY
-
13
Chapter XI
Hamilton moved to Washington to assist Knight (presumably Dave
Phillips] in the propaganda work. An attempt to secure Mexican coopera-
tion to obtain a re-fueling stop for the Guatemalan-based aircraft scheduled
to bomb Cuba failed because of the venality of a Mexican air force officer
fror.
whose price CIA would not meet. In Hamilton's vie
this was
2. As the Frente leaders were clamoring for invasion information,
it was determined to bring them to New York and to tell them if they wanted
to learn the assault plans and go to the beachhead, they would have to agres
to remain in isolation from that date forward. "Hamilton stresses
"voluntary" basis for this agreement, to counter later charges that CIA
had kidnapped the Frente and imprisoned them by force (p. 200).
3. With regard to the selection of the Bay of Pigs landing site,
Hamilton states that assault plans were almost entirely in the hands of
Pentagon (p. 203). Relations with Lem Jones' public relations firm in
New York are noted (p. 204).
4. A CIA project officer is flown to the Carrier Boxer, flagship of
naval task force that was assembled in Puerto Rican waters. This
officer was to serve as liaison between the naval task force commande
CIA Headquarters and the Cuban Brigade (p. 205).
SEGNET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
EYES ONLY
- 15.
-
Chapter XIII (commencing at p. 218)
The tenor of remarks in this chapter and in the conclusion of the
previous chapter is that the meeting with Rusk included the President,
Rostow, and Stevenson. [Other authoritative accounts have included only
Rusk, Cabell and Bissell; Tracy Barnes has said he also was present. I
is believed that the President was not at the meeting but was contacted
Rusk on the telephone at his Virginia home. There is no other indication.
other than Hamilton's allegation, that Walt Rostow was present]. (p. 219)
2. Hamilton' ad other anti-Cabell views are expressed, with
Indication that the call- -off of the second air strike would not have happ
had Dulles been in Washington (pp. 222-223).
SECRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
T
EYES ONLY
2
03
favorable, both on political and professional grounds. Jint Noel also
comes out poorly.
5. It is apparent that Hamilton feels very deeply about the Bay of
Pigs and its aftermath, to the extent that he is willing to put his career
on the line by circulating this manuscript to several publishers without
apparent clearance or authorisation. He has utilized as his nom de plume
the special name assigned to him in the project for dealing with the Cuban
Frente, and it would not take anyone who was involved in the Cuban Project
more than a few pages of reading to identify the author, as one potential
ansive
publisher pointed out. manuscript itself is the
story
knowledgi Meetings, conversations, and internal and external
actions are here reported extensively and with all the authority
"“insider" who was there. It far exceeds in detail anything that ha been
written on the Bay of Pigs, including Charles Murphy's article in Fortune
of September 1961 or the "insider" books that were published following the
death of President Kennedy.
CIA operation that has ever been written
Nicati
6. Attached herewith is a chapter-by-chapter description of the
manuscript particularly as it affects CIA security. This analysis states
what the author states, whether right or wrong. Where I have occasion-
ally added comments of my own, they are in brackets [].
Attachment
As noted above
Distribution
Orig& 2 - D/Security
* HIC
w/att.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
Walter Pforzheimer
Curator
Historical Intelligence Collection
1-J0

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
CWY
16 -
Chapter XIII (commencing at page 225. This chapter is apparent)
misnumbered.)
1. This chapter describes some of the battle problems at
head. Three jets from the Bozer were allowed a reconnaissance
oveż
besi
er the beach (p. 227). Finally the President authorised an hour's air
cover from the Boxer, but the time was fouled up and the Brigade's B-26's
were ot down before the air cover arrived (p. 230)
..
SECRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
14
Cha
hapter XI
This chapter tells of the initial air raid on Chb Ambassador
Stevenson's doubt at the UN as to the origins of the planes are surfaced,
and Barnes and Hamilton draft a message to Stevenson. When Stevenson
received it and was advised of the true nature of the planes, Hamilton
heard that Stevenson had called the White House to express his resent-
ment (p. 211).
not
whe
U-2 photography showed the initial air raid on Cuba]
sful as claimed
sing
second strika
ed the Headquarters War Room (p. 214
strike had en authorised,
Project Officers.
cars gave as their opinion that there had been no limitation
other than to knock out the Cuban air force.” General Cabell
Bissell and stated that the matter would have to be checked out with
Secretary Rusk. In the meantime, the second strike was held up (p. 215).
Cabell and Bissell went to meet Rusk at State. Adverse comments in
In th
War Room about General Cabell are quoted (p. 216).
SECRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
- 17
Chapter XIV
In this chapter, Hamilton is highly critical of the post-invasion
ättacks on CIA by Administration officials and the press. Hamilton note
the President's establishment of the Taylor Committee to look into th
causes of the failure and states his conclusion that the Committee
"whitewash the New Frontier by heaping guilt on CIA" (p. 234).
The only exception to these attacks was Charles Murphy':
article in the September 1961 Tortme. Hamilton believes the artičle
Administration official
defended the
Hamilton does a
Admiral
ed
I the President to commit
source's name (p. 238). [Presu
niral Burke). Hamilton charges that one subsequent CIA C
Cuban Operations was removed because of incompatibility with
Kennedy (p. 242).
SEGRET
EYES Y
:A

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
Chapter I
EYES ONLY
chapter opens in 1956 in Ambassador Gardner's office in Havana,
where a courtesy call was being paid on the Ambassador by the CIA Central
American and Caribbean Chiefs of Station who are holding their annual regional
meeting, “It is noted that one of the reasons for selecting the place of meeting
J.G.
absence of Communist embassies" (p. 6). The presence of Cal. J. G.
King, Division
Division Chief, is mentioned. Col. King remarks that Castro was
eavily involved" in the Bogotaso, setting the stage for Hamilton's subss
quent comment. [Actually Castro played a junior role in the Bogotaso, and
it was after the Bay of Pigs that Mr. Dulles assigned Hamilton the tố
determining Castro's role in the Bogotaso.] (p. 7). Hamilton states that in
the subsequent three years, while funds were being collected in South America
for Castro's 26th of July Movement, there were no orders from CIA Head-
quarters to penetrate pre-Castro groups abroad (p. 10). He then states that
In March 1960 he was having coffee with the newly-elected president of the
✓ country to which I was assigned." (p.10) (This could reveal the author's
relationship with President Nardone of Uruguay who became President in
arly March 1960]
L
Richard Bissell and Mr. Tracy Barnes are mentioned and
the author adds that he had worked with Barnes as a member of the team
that ousted President Arbens from Guatemala (p. 11). At this point Hamilton
ecalled to Headquarters to become Chief of Political Action in an
Eisenhower-approved project to assist Cuban exiles in overthrowing Castro.
His duties would include organising Cuban leaders into a government-in-
xile which would form a provisional government in Cuba when Castro was
forced out. Hamilton's base was to be in Costa Rica, provided ex-President
Pepe Figueres could obtain Costa Rican agreement (p. 11). [This link could
be quite embarrassing in view of Figueres' recent re-election as President
of Costa Rica.]
3. At this point the manuscript introduces the Project Chief as Jake
presumably Mr. Esterline), who is referred to as Jake throughout (p. 12).
We also meet Droller about whom there is some "diversity in attitudes"
among CIA officers. Droller's operational name of Frank Bender is noted (p. 13),
´and he is referred to as Bender throughout the rest of the manuscript. [This
is not the first time Droller has been identified as Bender; his name was
blown by Arthur Schlesinger in his book A Thousand Days in 1965.) Bender's
cover telephone arrangements in Miami and New York, which allowed him to
answer local calls there at his Washington desk, are disclosed (p. 14).¨¨
Hamilton states that Bender told him that as far as he knew "Richard Helms,
Chief of Operations for the Clandestine Services, had not been cut in" (p. 14).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
2.00

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
Hamilton calls on the Project's Propaganda Chief (presuma
Phillips), whom he calls Knight throughout, noting that Knight had
for him on the Guatemala project. He notes that Knight "had spent most
GIA career on the outside, 1.e., under cover", and that he had spent the three
preceding years under cover in Havana. At this polat Knight was also estab
Hishing a clandestine radio on Swan Island (p. 15). The Paramilitary Chief is
lso introduced and is called Ned throughout. (p. 15). Nad tells Hamilton that
an refugees are being recruited and polygraphed at Useppa Island off Fort
Florida (p. 16). Hamilton is also advised of the role of Roberto Alajos
the Retalulehu base in Guatemala; that all this had the consent
matema
lastic p
rtain
Ydigoras. [This his all been
eviously publish
published. (p.
KIA
7.
Carl Williamson
STN Hamilton idered fre
Jim Noel, and his
is deputy
Castro while he
with certain rabel groups
the Sierra Maestra, and
(p.17). Hamilton also charges that
sistant Secretary of State Rubottom and William Wieland "exercised co
Quence" over Col. J.C. King (p.18).
Kẵng
Hamilton returned to his station, closed out his affairs and ther
back to Washington. Resigning from the Foreign Service] "my cover
then flew to Spain to try to defect the Cuban military attacha
the time”,
There (p. 20).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
3-JD

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_5.jpeg ---
"
14-00000
EYES ONLY
Chapter II
1. In this chapter Hamilton states that Barnes and others recommende
that he visit Havana, and that the CIA Cover Staff provided him with the docu-
mentation for his operational alias of Edward J. Hamilton which he kept for
the duration of the Project (p. 23). Upon returning from Havana, Hamilton
prepared a report and recommendations. "The first recommendation was that
Castro be assassinated before or coincident with the invasion. Hamilton con-
sidered this his principal recommendation, but Barnes would only tell him
subsequently that it was in the hands of a "special group." So far as Hamilton
was able to determine, no plan was developed within CIA sassinate
in
Castro (pp. 30-31). (These comments would be unfortunate if published,
+
current charges in the press of various CIA assassinations"
view
Hamilton describes a luncheon that he and Jake had with Brig.
General Robert Cushman, then Assistant for National Security Affairs to
Vice President Nixon. Hamilton had known Cushman when the latter had had
an earlier tour in CIA, and Jake said that Cushman followed the Cuban Pro-
ject for the Vice President. Hamilton states that Cushman advised him that
Nixon "as Chairman [sic] of the National Security Council, was the real
spark plug behind the project" and the Administration's focal point and trouble-
shooter regarding it. The General gave Hamilton his private telephone
number in the event that he had something for the Vice President's urgent
attention (pp. 31A-32).
SECRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
[REQU
Chapter III (commencing at page 34)
In Chapter II, here again Hamilton's distaste for Bender comes
through. The difference is particularly one of their political philosophies --
Hamilton being quite conservative and Bender being a liberal, lis., Hamilton
was pro-Nixon, Bender apparently anti-Nixon. Hamilton gets the impression
fin both Chapters II and III) that conservative Cuban elements, such
business and professional communities, would not be much utilised in the
Project's plans. In Hamilton's view, the emphasis was on utilising Cubans
who had originally supported Castro but who had fled Caba when they became
aware of the direction in which the Ca stro Revolution
moving.
hún
to
Hamilton discusses the
their budget (p. 35-39).
leade
Hamilton tells of visiting the Cuban Project headquarters in è
Gables, noting the building's disguise as an electronics firm for cove
poses (p.39), as well as CIA subsidies to Cuban exilé groups and newspapers
In an intra-office squabble with the paramilitary elements of the Project,
Hamilton loses control of military hardware, a decision he considers basi-
cally wrong in that it placed the paramilitary people in charge of what the
Cubans wanted most and thus undercut Hamilton's political action role (pp. 42-43)
The bulk of the chapter describes the various members of the Frente includin
their idiosyncrasios,
well:
ecount of those who would not join.
SECRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
Chapter IV
1. Mention is made of the training of an exile parachute battalion
in Quatemala. The training was being handled by Colonel Lake (pres
(presumab
[Low Rucker] "one of the world's most experienced parachutists" (p.
Mention is also made of Hamilton's assistant, Bernie, who had original
57)
joined the Havana police force at CIA request, which ultimately lost him
his U.S. citizenship. (p. 59). CIA funding of the Freate through forels
is noted (p. 60). Some problems with Bender including a security
which came to the attention of the FEI, are
(p.60).
ecurity flap is noted (pp. 63-64), when it
ssistant in Mexico City had his briefcase
Hamilton was
ent on his relations
statement on
the resultam
Sam al
discov
wvinced
King's ill-will, and never spoke
spöke to him after that” IP65). Hamilte
that a Marine Colonel named Haskins had been placed in charge of
Project's paramilitary operations, seconded from the Joint Chi
Chiefs of Staf
He garnered Hamilton's ill-will by refusing to accede to the
that they be permitted to visit the training site in Guatemala.
There is some
's request
ation of relations with the Coast Guard 3
Florida in alerting them to those boats which CIA desired to allow to
through to Cuba without being stopped. This chapter also includes the
usual problems of squabbling within the Frents,
SECRET
EYES ONLY
?OD!

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGRED
EYES ONLY
Chapter III (commencing at page 45. This is a second Chapter III and
apparently was misnumbered.)
The attempt to locate the Frente in Costa Rica having falled, it
determined to set them up in Mexico City, to which Hamilton and his
family now repaired. Hamilton's office was to be independent of the Station
and his cover was to be that of a fiction writer. Hamilton's use of an
American businessman in Mexico named Sam às his principal manager
Frente activities,
tivities, safehouses and the like are described. Here the name
Mânolo Ray is first introduced (pp. 50-52).
Harassme
tempte
the P
culties o
This
roject
merican sell.
an sell.
#14
ment by the Mexican police and other thorities, includ
ice, caused Hamilton to recommend withdrawal
problem because President Eisenhow
Cuban as possible which
cb prasented diffi
However, things proved so difficult in Mexic
Frente was moved back to Miami in October 1960. This caused
personal difficulty to Hamilton because it was impossible to explain
young children why he should be living under an assumed name in
As a result, his wife and children were forced to come back to
Washington, while Hamilton stayed in Miami.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
1J0

--- Image 104-10119-10182_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
EYES ONLY
:
-7
Chapter V
Hamilton writes in this chapter (p.77), and in several subsequent
chapters, of the general failure of infiltration efforts into Cubs, the roll-up
of those that got there, and the poor record for delivering supplies to those
anti-Castro guerrillas who might have gotten into Cuba. Maritime operations
also were not very effective.
2. Hamilton underscores the fact that at no meeting of which he
are was it asserted that the Cuban underground or population was sched-
uled to play a significant role in the invasion. He notes the many statements
the contrary that
that appeared lá th
the press and elsewhere from uninform
er of the chapter describer Hamilton's
Frente, his conversations with the
Ion of 1960 and President Kennedy's fnange
entators (p 79).
views on various
Ing the period be
ction
d
ration, during which timi lot of the
the activity ground to a halt. Hamilton
here also again airs one
one of
of his major gripes, namely that the Cuban political
objectives were being continually downgraded in favor of the paramilitary
operations (pp. 92–93).
SECRET
EYES ONLY