

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_10.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
:.
98
24
are assisting in some reduction of the personality files. The
Registry also handles the pouching. This task is also the largest
in the WH Division, particularly in lateral pouching. On one occa-
sion, at Headquarters' request, Mexico City handled the lateral
pouching to 35 stations and bases of one document.
"The problems of the Registry are compounded by the lack
of training provided personnel assigned to the Registry. Person-
nel problems in the Registry are many and diversified. First of
all, with the limited mumber of personnel and the great burden of
work, a large amount of overtime has been required. Secondly, it
has been difficult to get people to accept an assignment to the
Mexico City Registry because the tasks are dull, tedious, and infi-
nitely demanding of the individuals' time. The morale in this
section vas poor. We made several recommendations to the chief of
• station pointing out to him a conscientious effort must be made by
all members of the station to reduce the workload in the Registry.
In this connection, we suggested that individual case officers ac-
cept the responsibility for periodic cleaning of files which they
used, and of which they have the most intimate knowledge. We
further recommended that maximm discrimination be used in determin
ing material which should be filed and that wherever possible the
sheer bulk of the filing be reduced. We further recommended that
overtime be made voluntarily whenever possible, but that in any
event personnel be provided with a full weekend off from time to
time.
60. The chief of the Registry is the only senior person
signed to the Registry and has no deputy or other person competent
to take his place during his temporary absence. The chief at the
time of our inspection had taken very little time off, including
weekends in the two years of his tour. We feel that one of the
positions in the Registry should be re-evaluated for possible upgrad-
ing to includes the duties of deputy chief of Registry.
It is recommended that:
The Chief, WH Division, request the Director of
Personnel to conduct a review of the function of
Deputy Chief, Registry, Mexico City Station, to deter-
mine whether or not such a position should be estab-
lished in an appropriate grade
No. 78
- 23 -
SECRET
JM/2

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_1.jpeg ---
00000
104-10301-10010
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
98
[Significant]
98
SECRET
with a limited number of people. We believe the direction of the
station is of high caliber, but not all the station effort is
carefully directed at priority targets. Under current personnel
ceilings, there is little hope of increasing the mampover avail-
able for this critical effort. Thus, both Headquarters and the
station must carefully place emphasis on assignment of priorities
and upon selective execution of the activities to meet those
priorities.
Organization for Operations
5. The Mexico City Station approaches the classic type station
in opportunities and in operations. It has high-level liaison
operations, unilateral operations, joint operations with the host
government, and Soviet, Satellite, Cuban, and indigenous Communist
Party operations. It has local collaborative liaison with other
U.S. agencies: the State Department, the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation, the Immigration and Naturalisation Service and the military.
To accomplish this wide range of tasks, the station is organized
into the Soviet Branch, Cuban Branch, Satellite Branch, Covert
Action Branch, Communist Party Branch, and an operational catch-all
which is called the "Operational Support Branch. This latter
branch is headed by a senior operations officer who has two assist-
ants, but the branch in reality is an extension of the chief of
station's personal clandestine capabilities, giving force and
effect to that facet of the chief of station's personality
operator. The deputy chief of station, in addition to his admin-
istrative duties, also personally handles the operations of three
projects.
Cuban Operations
6. Mexico City is the only direct air link which Cuba has
with the Western Hemisphere. It is the major transit point for
all air travel to and from Guba. Approximately 150 persons per
week travel each way to and from Havana via Mexico City. This
fact plays a prime role in shaping the station's operational activi-
ties. For example, over [10] per cent of the station's FI reporting
on Cuban activities in the past year dealt with travel, both Cuban
and non-Cuban, between Mexico City and Havana.
The station has no agents reporting from in place in Cuba.
Two operations have had problems in loss of communications, but
have some promise of future success. One agent, a Cuban refugee
2
SECRET
DM $3

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_3.jpeg ---
13-00000
98
98
SECRET
operational leads and debriefs those with information of intelli-
gence value. Heretofore this project has suffered from lack of
adequate facilities and trained personnel. Only 29 positive in-
telligence reports were disseminated by Headquarters during the
past year. It is plamed to correct these deficiencies and expand
capabilities to the end that the intelligence product will be in-
proved and the operational leads increased. An experienced officer
im
from the JISAVE refugee center has been detailed to the station to
training the
unal the
there.
11. The station's Cuban case officers must devote a substan
tial effort to responding to requests for support from other
stations, chiefly JSAVE, with involvement in Cuban operations.
24 Approximately 47 per cent of the station's cable traffic is con-
cerned with Cube operations. This volume alone is testimony to
the relative effort which must be devoted to the support of Cuban
operations originating in other CIA stations. The Cuben case
officers in Mexico City feel that the requirements to keep abreast
of day to day activities and to handle the volume of paper left
insufficient time for planning and development of an effective
station_eperational pros
12. Operations are being conducted against the Cuber Bebessy, 24
and the results, while limited, are as satisfactory as may be ex-
pected in view of the target. Given Nexico City's Strategic loca-
tion astride the only direct air link to Cuba, more success should
be achieved in (recruiting agents in place in Cuba. This target
has been assigned as Priority 1 to many Latin Américan countries
and, if it is to be achieved at all, it is logical to expect that
it will be done in Mexico City.] To the extent possible, the Caban
case officers should be freed from the anecessive support to other
stations so they can commentrate on this target. The Chief, WH
Division, should direct other stations to carefully screen Cuban
requirements on Mexico City, with a view toward reduction of such
requirements.
It is recommended that:
The Chief, WH Rivision:
Instruct the Chief of Station, Mexico City,
to concentrate Cuban ease officer efforts on develop-
ing agent assets resident in Cuba; and,
No. 67
24
open
1.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_4.jpeg ---
98
ECRET
13-00000
evidence that the ambassador would strongly object to Agency support
In addition, of a total anmial
budget of $16,000, $6,000 goes for the
for the
for 1188 propaganda activities. In day of a U.8. businessman
cutout (LIHUFF-1) while $6,000 goes to the support of MURO and
$4,000 to support other activities of the II. This is an inordi-
nately high sun for the services of a cutent in proportion to the
total cost of the proposed project. These points, taken together,
constitute a valid basis for terminating operations in connection
with LIHUFT
It is
The Chief, WH Division, disapprove the proposal
of Chief of Station, Mexico, for Project LINEFF
direct him to terminate operations in connection
therewith.
TO
18. The station has a highly successful project directed at
the rural and peasant targets. The principal agent is a Catholic
priest through whose efforts an extensive network of regional organi-
sations have been established including youth groups, credit unions,
agricultural co-ops and peasant unions. Somm 26 regional centers of
the Mexican Institute for Social Studies, a project mechanism, have
been set up and 12,000 people were enrolled in special training
courses during the year. This operation is now largely self-sufficient
but the station should contime to give it sumpert and direction.
The project shown promise of expending into Gas
expending into Guatemala where the
Archbishop of Guatemala has asked for assistance and training to
set up a similar organisation. In view of the present lack of
Agency-sponsored peasant projects in Quaterals, every effort shoulä
be made to exploit this possibility.
It is recommended that:
The Chief, WH Division, expand Project LINOODLE
to include assistance in establishing a similar
covert action project targeted on peasant groups in
Sevict Operations
No. 71
19. Mexico is one of the four Latin American countries which
maintain diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union thereby per»
mitting the establishment of diplomatic installations in these
- 8 -
SECRET
IM/1

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_11.jpeg ---
13,00000
BECRET
61. We found the Registry to be a controversial matter between
Headquarters and the chief of station. The newly assigned deputy
chief of station, whe primarily had mupervisory responsibility over
the chief of Registry, was making a determined effort to reduce the
vorkload in the Registry and to seek means of relying upon Hend-
quarters' files rather then station files.
station files. We were told that on
several occasions, Headquarters had reached the point of demanding
that Mexico City reduce its Registry to a sise comparable to other
lons. Each time such a decision was reached, there would be
a concurrent fisp which would prove the value of Mexico City's
ability to instantly retrieve information from their files. One
of the most noteworthy of such flaps took place in November 1963,
when Mexico City's files trought forth detailed information on
Lee Harvey Osvald's visits to the Cuban end Soviet Essbassies in
Mexico City.
62. the nature of Rico City's operations, particularly its
technical operations ALENVOX and LIFEAT produce voluminous files.] 24
Until some system is devised for this information to be quickly 24
24 ✓ digested and retrieved in Headquarters, we believe that there is
no alternative to the present system Mexico City is employing.
However, we believe that a determined effort must be in Headquarters
for processing and retrieval of such information
24%
The Chief, WH Division, in collaboration with the
Chief, Records Integration Division, devise a system
for reducing the volume of files hald in Neries City,
while maintaining a capability for rapid retrieval
from Keadquarters of information essential to present
and future operations in Mexico.
Hb. 19
63. Maico City is one of the great metropolises of the world
and the beaming economy of Mexico is reflected in its housing. It
is difficult to find housing which compares exactly with United
States housing because the Spanish tradition of servants' quarters,
large space, and grand entertainment are a basic way of life.
However, in such a great city, there is naturally a large selection
of housing within this limitation. There are good apartments, but
such apartments usually are more expensive than allowances will
permit for single occupancy. Housing for officers and families is
generally quite good, not plentiful, but with prudent selection,
adequate housing can be found within reasonable range of the
24
SECRET
98
IM15
t

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_2.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
98
98
SECRE
The
now working in Mexico City, had recruited three sub-agents before
Leaving Cuba but his chamel of communications with then has been
severed. Another station agent is in a good position in Cuba to
obtain intelligence from foreign telephone communications.
station vill attempt to re-establish contact with hin through
legal traveler to Cuba. The station has mmber of sources with
access to Cubs in third country nationals who are debriefed each
time they return to Nexico City from Cuba. Best of these is a
Western European who was the source of some 15 dinseminated intelli-
He travels to Cuba four or five times
ye
gence reports started by a station onse officer after each visit.
and contacted
An operation, presently under development, is aimed at exploiting
presence of a religious order. Å recruited agent will be in
the high levels of the Mission. It is expected that the Mission
vill have secure commmications facilities as is the case in other
countries. Primary control, however, will be maintained by Maxico
City Station through contact with the agent each time he travels
to Mexico City from
9. A major objective of station operations is the recruit-
ment of personnel in the Cuban Rubasay. There are about 20 Cubans
on the embassy staff of bem[six]are
[six are believed to be members of the 24
Cuban Intelligence Service/As with operations directed dégainst
the Soviet Embassy, [peavy reliance] is placed upon surveillance
through telephone, photo, physical, and audio operations as well
on access agents. The effort has bem rewarded with some muc-
us (albeit limited. Une official has been recruited, but his
generally low due to lack of access to information of
prim importance and to a reluctance to accept operational assign- 24
ment:
Mexican woman employee in the embassy is also a station
but she
she has no accuss to classified documents and provides
only meager information. A recruitment pitch to another officer
24 was unsuccessful and he was subsequently recalled to Cubs.] Through
Station efforts a "hot mike" vas successfully placed in a key office.
Unfortunately, the target officer moved, and his old office is now
being occupied by an officer of lesser potential, who is the super-
visor of the recruited officer]] This undio device is at the moment
of little value except to provide an excellent check of the egent's] 08
activities..
10. As might be expected, Maxico City has a constant stream
of refugees from Cuba, estimated at about 350 per month. Through
an American contract agent the station runs the Cuban Refugee Re-
ception and Orientation Center which screens refugees for possible
08
SECRET
IM/E

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_5.jpeg ---
13-00000
98
SECRET
24
countries. Because of the relative ineffectivences of the Mexican
police and security services, Boviet activities in Mexico are not
subjected to the same scrutiny as they are in the U.S by the FBI 24
and in Canada by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Soviet person”
nel in Mexico thus have a freedom of movement which facilitates the
conduct of clandestine operations targeted not only against the U.8.
but also against other Latin American countries where there is no
Bovist official presence. In addition, Mexico's long border with
the U.§. has only minimm guards. Travel between the U.B. and
Mexico is heavy and clandestine border crossing can be relativaly
simple. The Soviet Embassy in Mexico City, therefore, assumes more
than the usual interest normally attached to similar Soviet in-
stallations as targets for U.S. intelligence.
20. Soviet operations conducted by the station are directed
24 primarily at the personnel of the embassy. At the present time,
there are fifty-one officers attached to the embassy of whom thirty-
24 three] have been identified as members of either the HMB or the Ore
It may be assumed that dependents and nonintelligence persoanel,
QFU.
by performing various support functions, swell the total of those
engaged in intelligence assignments. In its operations against the
Soviets, the station is heavily dependent upon technical collec
tion through telephone taps, photographic coverage of the embassy,
physical surveillance, and hidden microphones. These operations
24 produce masses of information (Cally on the activities of the Soviet 24
personnel, such as telephone conversations with persons outside the
embassy, complete photographic records of the coming and going of
24 [all persons]-Soviet and non-Soviet--at the embassy, contents of
embassy personnel outside the embassy, etc. Because of the strict
security indoctrination of Boviet overseas personnel, the bulk of
this information is low-level and not disseuximable as positive in-
24 telligence. Its chief value, aside from occasional items of intelli- 24
gence interest or operational import, derives from its compilation 24
in depth to reveal patterns of activities and contacts indicative
of intelligence (missions or associations, and to disclose behaviorial
characteristics of individual Soviets which might be symptomatic
of a vulnerability to recruitment.1nalysing this materia
Mentified Boviet officers in the
into their modus operandi in
Gained
Mariarial 24
executing intelligence assignments. This in itself is of value
a counterintelligence point of view even though exploitation
ainst Soviets has been limited. Also, by collating the mass of
collected data into personality reports on persons atteched to the
Embassy, the station hopes to be able to detect, foster, and even-
§ tually exploit any vulnerability to recruitment or detection--the
f.
9 -
SECRET

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_6.jpeg ---
13-00000
98
}:
SECRET
ber one priority of Soviet operations here as elsewhere in
the world.
21. The station is seeking to supplement its collection
through technical means with a progren to acquire at least one
coess agent for each number of the Soviet Embassy staff. These
access agents serve two purposes: first, they provide addi-
tional information on the activities and personalities of those
with whom they are in contacts and second, they afford a chann
mej
for "getting st' Soviet individual should it be found advantageous
to bring some sort of recruitment pressure to bear on him. Con-
sideration is now being given by the station to expanding the
effort to recruit Murieun nationals who are known, through tech-
nical collection sources, to have been in touch with the Soviets
on intelligenze missions and to work through them to develop in-
formation on Soviet clandestine activities. Additional case officer
trength will be needed if this spproach is to be effective.
22. The station currently has six double-agent operations.
Like most such eases they move slowly. The chief purpose in
rumming these operations is to direct the agunts into the U.S.
where, in cooperation with the FBI, they might be used to identify
Soviet illegals. Three of these double agents have all received
intelligunos assignments from the Soviets of em as yet undefined
nature in the U.S. Another appears destined for some Soviet
sigument in the Philipaines. Since the Soviets have no efficial
presentation in the Philippines, it is hoped that this agent
be put in touch with illegals. Still another is considered
por double agent operation by the station, but showS BOMB
promise of developing into a penstration of the Mexican Foreign
Ministry. The sixth is rated very low as a station operation,
and is being contimed only at the specific request of the U.S.
Army. The station's technical collection assets provide a useful
mens for checking these double agents in their contacts with the
Soviets.
23. To evaluate properly the Soviet &perations at Mexico
City, which rely heavily on expensive technical collection (devices)
would involve a basic albesam of the whole concert of Bovist
operations, which is beyond the scope of this report. Despite the
exploitation of material collected by technical gean for over ten
years at the station, the primary objective of recruiting a Soviet
24 national has not been achieved? Although the station's knowledge
of Soviet intelligence activities centered about the embassy in ]
Mexico City has been greatly Fidened, it has led to little positive
:) 24
24
03
10.
SECRET
1
24
DM/A

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_8.jpeg ---
13-00000
!
98
98
responsible to control from the female operations officer who has
recently been transferred to LILIK control. It is possible That
this operation will be transferred to a covert action project,
where some improvement is expected.
41. The station has a unilateral physical surveillance team,
five of whom have been on the team for more than three years.
Only one case of trouble has shown up in this project. One agent
had
terminated because he talked too much and tried to black-
officer. The use of the polygraph has been most
control of this team, which has been generally
affe
ive.
Technical Operations
intly
The station is heavily committed in the technical field
with a large audio operation Fun jointly with the Mexican Govern- 24
ment (LIKIVOY), as well as a unilateral audio operation (LIFEAT). 24
The station has been imaginative in approaches to problems and
villing to examine and experiment with the umsual. an example of
this is the communications link between the station and the princi- 24
pal agent of LILLINK, which will be discussed later.
43. The LIENVOY operation, previously mentioned in connection
with Soviet operations, resulted from an approach six years ago 24
from President Lopes Mateos] After considerable discussions, the
operation was approved, providing the Nexican Government would in- 29,24
clude Soviet and Satellite targets, and such other communist targets
as were obvious to the Mexican Government to be of concern to the 24
United States. This project is manned by elected Mexican Army 24
personnel, who are carefully screened and paid high incentive wages,
08 reducing their vulnerability to bribery. Other privileges add to
the high esprit de corps essential to such an
an operation. The unit
were Governance or concert 3)
24
is managed by a career agent who transmits the take regularly to
the station by clandestine means. This project has been fruitful
in intelligence reports and has been of value in operational leads
and in [CE/OF] information. The project also has a visual surveil
Lance and a photo-surveillance capability. It was this project
which provided data on the actions of Lee Harvey Oswald in his
famous visit to Naxico City.
Obviously, the station cannot be content to have the
Mexican Government knowledgeable of all its anti-communist opera-
tions. Therefore, the station has continued its unilateral audio
16 -
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
.

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_7.jpeg ---
13-00000
24
SECRET
[action to counter these activities) as they might affect U.S.
Interests. While all the U.8.8.R. diplomatic missions are targets
of vital importance for U.8. intelligence, the Soviet Embency in
Mexico City has special significance because of its proximity to
the U.S. The Mexico City Station has attacked this target with
determination and imagination. The Chief, SR Division, and his
principal officers have commended highly the Soviet operations in
Mexico City Station. The failure time far to
to achie
objectives is testimony more to the impregnability of the targ
then to a lack of resourcefulness in attacking it. Thus, we
Lieve that until some new methods, offering gre
J
developed he preeca
contimed
ted at the present level.
24
24
24
stack should
Sb. Probably the mat significant contribution which the
station's operations against the Soviets in Mexico [City] has made 08
to the U.S. security has been peripheral to the Agency's mission
The embassy has long been a magnet for disaffected Ameri-
cans who
to vent for one reason or another to establish contact with
the Soviets. Through its technical coverage of the Soviet Rubersy, 24
the station has been able to got and, through
to a of such of
on metion,
to thwart a number of such Amricans, several of have
done untold dawnge to U.S. interests had they not been apprehended. 24
In this respect, the station works elõsely with the FEI.
Warren
en Commission's report on the assassination of President
Kennedy made reference to information collected by station assets
connection with Oswald's activities in Maxico City.
98
he
The Batellite Branch, which is staffed by ES Division
personnel, has been diverting mich of its recent time from its EX
rgets to Commist-Chinese presence in Mexico City. Although
there is no official government representation by Peking regime,
New China Reve Agency (NHA) has several people in Mexico City.
At least three of these individuals have been identified as cuERCOM
intelligence officers. Project HIPESO is an adio operation against
rooms of their offices, their telephone lines are tapped
der the LIFEAT Project. Bem of their usil has been examined
ugh the LIKAYAK Project. The row results of these operations
been forwarded back to Headquarters. The Mexico City Station
no capability for the translation of the material. As of the
time of the inspection, the station had heard nothing from Headquarter.
- 11 -
SECRET
Im 10

--- Image 104-10301-10010_page_9.jpeg ---
13-00000
1
198
SECRET
Exclude routine travel information and CI/CE
ation from WDCS and C3 reports; and,
d. Use the cable channel only for reports that
re perishable or of special intelligence interest.
Organisation for Administre
usual authority to as
56. As in his direction of operations, the chief of station
maintains a close personal hold upon the administrative life of
his station Such delegation as he makes does not include the
granting of For example, although
the deputy has been delegated authority over the Registry, which
vill be discussed in detail later, in reality the chief continues
daily activities which have a marked effect on the Registry. The
station has a small, hard-working support section, handling finan-
cial and proparty matters, and the usual fine commumications
section.
57. Morale and health were generally good, although for
city as modern as Mexico there is an ummual amount of abdominal
disorder known in Mexico City as "Montezum's Revenge. The
embassy furnishes adequate medicines, and medicines are available
on the open market, although not always to be trusted. One inci-
dent was recently uncovered in which sulfur uns capsuled and sold
antibiotic. Medical facilities have recently been improved
by the opening of a new hospital which meets United States standards
Physicians and surgeons are well trained and quite competent.
Insofar as social life is concerned, morals in the station vas
excellent. Mexico City offere some of the finest social activities
in the world, from honky tonk to opera. There is local television,
radio, and a great interest in male. There is a great deal of
outdoor activity available--swimming, tennis, golf, exploration
of ruins, and vast city parkı Some sporte activities are compara.
tively expensive. Hmbership in country clubs is prohibitive ex-
cept for persons on the dinim
One of
en
incipal administrative problems facing the
Chief of Station, Mexico City, is his Registry. The Registry
handles the station files which are more
then in any
other station in the WH Division. There are than 9,000 per
sonality files and a vast accumulation of
vast accumilation of 3×5 card files (mostly
biographic) which contime to increase at the rate of 23 Linear
inches per month. The station's present level of activity pre-
cludes any reduction in the card index file, but aperture cards
- 22
BECRET
10/1