

--- Image 104-10226-10045_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
After Mr. Oldfield had put a number of questions to Gismoas
the latter anked Oldfield whether Goddes is possibly a British ageat
which Oldfield emphatically answered, in the negative.
6. Mr. Olefield said that he would now sond off a comunication.
te bis service fadicating that Goddes might be a phozay--a provocateur.
to
Rovever, he asked that be bo provided with the following:
$. CIA appreciation of the United Revolucionaria;
Identities of C-1, C-4 and wesbers of the net with whos
C-1 was arrested on March 18 (Nota: Simmons acknowledged that besides
C-1 conceivably several other evabers of this set aight have known of
Geddes and his activities.)
Identities of the couriers who had contact with Ceúdos
The identity of the CIA case officer--the naso of namOS.
qood by him in contacts with Geddes;
Chronological aumsary of the visits of Gaddes to Missi
and returns to Bavana; also a list of the nature of his communications
to Rimal (by telecoa, courier, etc.) and communications seat to him in
Havana.
SECRET
John G. Roberte
DC/W8/6
Har
HAFE

--- Image 104-10226-10045_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-
3 ->
1 April: Geddes sent on 87 cosage which was hand-carried to
KIAST by a courier. Goddes also had a telecos with his wife on
this day.
2 April: Osidės said in talecen to
Odds maid in telecon to wife that haval conspirators
Would Best on 3 April and Geddes would give coon 5 April a final
date for the defection..
4. April: addes indicated in talecon to wife that the Naval
defection would take place "aay day” 203,
we
7 April: We received a usage from Godda Selivered by a thire
perty (courier) that the Navy plans to defect on 6 or 7 April.
Goddes returned to Hiasi and mald the date was 97 #st for
April.
ox 9
10 April:
Geddes returned to Havana.
11 Anvil: Gaddes telephoned his wife that the defection could take
place on 13 or 14 Aprfi.
16 April:
Geddes in telecon with wife reported that the defection"
would be on 17 or 19 April.
0. During the acesant of the above eksology, incas
made the following comments:
(1) The CIA agent inside (C-1) vouched for Geddes but we here is
Readquarters do not know to what extent C-bad probed into the, back-
ground of Coddes and his contacts. Be here is advise Hissi not to
Miami
take nay Bution until we had obtained Brities concerrence bat by
that time Geddes had alroady returned to Havana, He reiterated that
Geddes was a walk-in and was fever treated es an agent.
"
(2) Goddam and his foremst regarding the defection of the Caban
Havy word suspect free the batsat. He claimed to be a British
sitisen but was already performing for the E.B.
(3) To Mr. Oldfield's, question as to vesther Coddes had any access
to a / h, Sissoas replied that to his kaswledge Goddes caly had
phone contact with his wife, SW and use of courier.
(4) Ye arms deliveries were involved in the contact with Gaddas.
Geddes,
(8) Simmons said he would look into whom Coffes could certamiza to
or put the finger on.
(6) To E. Oldfield's repasted request for identition of
C-4. C-1, the Hilal case officer, and the ter that was arrested ons
18 March, Simsons replied that caly the DCI has the authority CP
relongs such information.
(T)
Kiani case officer ROTOP #Srved laside Cuba.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10045_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10226-10045
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
!
:
;
KANORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SECRET
May 1981
SUBJECT: Briefing of Mr. Maurice Oldfield,,MI-6, by WH/4, Clark Simmons
MI-6
1. Is view of the request of Mr. Maurice Oldfield, WI-8
representative, for identities and further particulars regarding the
Bobert Horton, Geddes case eating was held on 1 May 1981 with Wa/4/C1,
Clark Stemon, ihr. Cleveland C. Cras and John Roberts of WB/6°
#ith
C.
also present.
.8. At the outset Br. Oldfield provided the following information:
....
Geda❤
Robert Borton Godda is a British subject born in
Lima, Peru, on 7 April 1832. He holds Britta passport No. C-34880,
issued at Macagua on 14 June 1858. Be not reglagered at the
British Consulate in Havana and was regarded as being American or
Canadian.
B. Two employees of the British Embassy, Havana, has visited
Godies in the Baran jail (ailitary G-2 section) on Sunday evening,
30 April 1981, and had a 15-sincite conversation with Geddes alone uncer
etroudstances which they felt were not monitored. Geddes stated to
thea: (1) On 19 April he was arrested by the militia (in civilian
clothes) at his hotel; (2) He had been interrogated three times and
gave the impression that he had not disclosed anything of importance;
(s) He was accused of being a CIA agent, and told that he could bo
shot because of the existence of civil war:
During the third
interregation Geddes vase thom hero essage in Spanian
signed by God which was sent allegedly by him by radio-transaitter
asking that CIA send arme to Cuba..
that
(4)
BE
c. The British Embassy in Bavana learned on Saturday,
59 April 1961, that Goddes had regularly been "picked up" at the
Havana airport on his trips to and from Miami. (kr. Oldfield, vaa, aot
certain väst¨exact ·15tsrpretation could be given to the tera
"picked up").
-
3. After relating the above, Mr. Oldfield stated that his corvice
is interested in cbtaining an estimate of sort of story the Cubans
might use against Goddes or in provocation against the British Bobassy,
perhaps to prove that the British Rebey had been in collumion with
the C. 3: Re referred to the following specific questions which he
had submitted earlier on 2 Hay and which were relayed by 82/8 to Wa/4;
R. Hopkins for answers to be given in the afternees meesion by Clark
SANSORS:
SECRET
2

--- Image 104-10226-10045_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
:
GAUDES
What was the identity of the agent iowide Cuba who ga
the message he brought to the CIA contact in Misi on 11 march 1966;
b. That was the identity--or case or names
officer in Miani;
namas--cked by the CIA' case
r
d.
Was Geddes given any means of clandestine radio-transsisalon;
What were the instructions gives to GRODES by bis case officer.
4. Nr. Simmons replied as follows:
The coly means of consunication given to Geddem, bookdan his
open cōde phone contact with his wife in Boca Raton, VBS a very simple S
systen. Coddes was not given any means for clanteslice radio-transmission.
b. Blasons then read and related the following: chronology of
Godden' activities from WH/4 Tiles:
"
11 March! Gadder case to Miast on the sight of 11 arch and made contact
51th Cabbage/4, a Cuban in Missi who was it contact with the CIA office.
Gaddon had a message from Cabbage/1 a CIA contact inside Cuba, C-4 put
Gaddes in contact with a CIA case officer in Miami on 12 March.
claimed to be an active Roster of the United Revoluciszaria, a restriance
Geddes
group inside Cuba of which C-1 was er. At the 996 des said the
a
Cuban Navy has a plan to attack all pro-Castro facilities and then flee
Cubs on or about 22 bärch. Codes 21 cot ask for any money;
was not known. The case officer instructions to Gaddis veze related solely
His abtivation
to Geddes' report that the Cuban Navy defect.
Havana,
to
Geddes returned
16 March: Geddes
Geddes departed for Havaga.
Havrea,
-
'
20 Marcht We beard indirectly
That the individual (C-D with whom he had been collaborating in United
Geddes had photed his wife and indicated
Revolucionaria was in trouble. The fact behind this was that one of our
agouts (member of the CB) co
wife la Cuba. As a result = R Bet of preopere was arrested including
•Cuba bad against instructions visited his
C-1. Besides C-1, scue of the other of ath net nes of Codden' activities
2
21 March: Gedden returned to Miami.
S#
28 March: Gedden came to Havana.
Beginning about 28 March we had reasse to supot Gadea as a possible
He was given a simple 8# system.
provocateur since the defection had not come off and possibility of keeping
the defection of the Navy secret in itself was implausible.
27 March: Geddes sont * SW asssage to Mint regarding the possible Cuban
Raval defection.
28 March: Through open ocfe telecom with wife said defection of Navy ast
For to 4 April..
39 March:
Caddes called wife on telephone.
ML
SECRET