

--- Image 104-10165-10004_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
1. Robin Moore
a. Moore has just returned from Viet Nam where he partici-
pated in the combat operations of the American Special Forces in Viet Nam. after
he had gone through about eight months of training at the Special Forces School
at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. Sone understanding of Moore's personality may be
ontained from reading au interview between him and the magazine U. S. News and
World Report. which was published recently, and copy of which was left with
Maria. Further understandings and impressions of Moore may be obtained from
reading his previously published took about Jack Youngblood. an American who
participated in the events leading to Castro's overthrow of Battista.
b. In my opinion. Moore has a burning desire to be known
as a tough, two-fisted, rip roaring soldier of fortune. He has participated
in real war in Viet Nam, and has received what is probably the best training
in the world for guerilla fighters. namely, the U. S. Special Forces. This
includes training as a parachutist. He is inclized to brag. and is probably
inclined to interperate use of alcohol and women. and his judgement of im-
portant matters is probably immature. However. he definitely understands
and is experienced in guerilla fighting, is experienced in military operations,
and must surely understand military security.
'
He is definitely willing to help, but cannot contribute
cash directly; is willing to furnish the use of the guest house on his property
for limited periods of time. Is willing to participate and aid in an operation
to land people on the scath coast of Cuba, but is not willing to commit the use
of his property and facilities as a staging area for resupply in the future.
d. Is willing to come to Miami, for conferences if his
expenses are paid.
2.
Site Evaluation
a. Blue Hole is an excellent bartor; protected against
all weather. and with six feet of water at the bar. Is surrounded by very
steep slopes, heavily wooded. Dock facilities are presently very meager,
but could be quickly and easily improved. No fuel for a boat is available
at Blue Hole, and at Fort Antonio (the closest source). the fuel available
is diesel fuel or automotive gasoline; no marine white gasoline is available
anywhere is the area. This is a most significant factor in selecting a
suitable boat.
b. The nearest source of food and other supplies is Port
Autonio; Fred Barrett. manager of the Blue Lagoon Club. orders and hauls
supplies from Port Autorio constantly, and could deliver whatever supplies
were desired. Firearms and explosives are not obtainable on the island.
They would have to be smuggled in illegally.
C.
A small station wagon is available for transportation,
provided expenses are paid by users.
3.
Miscellaneous. Informatiou
A local man. George Vunroe. is reported to be a very
experienced small boat captain and one who has brought boats down from Miami
1

--- Image 104-10165-10004_page_1.jpeg ---
1400000
104-10165-10004
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETYAT
On Friday, 19 June, departed Miami for Kingston, Jamaica via
Pan American. leaving Viani at 0:00 and arrivim kingston via Montego Bay
at 10:15 M. This flight contitures to on to San Juan. Puerto Rico. and latin
passengers are commonplace. In passing through inmigration and cusions. it
is necessary to give the imigration inspector the name of a specific botel
or address at which you can be reached in Jamaica.
.
Obtained rental car from Hertz Car Rental and departed Kingston
Airport at 10:45 Avia Highway A for Fort Antonio of the worth coast. High-
vay 14 follows the coast around the eastern tip of the island. There is another
As shown
route to Fort Antonio. over the mountains. but it is not recommended.
on the standard highway map of the island. there is a small cove about seven
The core is roughly
miles east of Port Antonio designated as "Blue Hole".
200 feet wide by 500 feet long, and completely protected from the open sea
and weather. The cove is extremely deep. and is reported to have a minimum
depth of six feet at the entrance. Tidal range appears to be very small, per-
haps one to two feet.
On
When I arrived at Blue Hole. which is about 2-1/2 hours by
road from Kingston, Robin Voore was not available; I went into Port Autonio
I returned to blue Hole about
and secured a roon at the Bonnie Vue Hotel.
five o'clock and there met Robin Voore. Mr. Voore owns most of the land
surrounding Blue Hole. with the Jamaican goverment owning the balance.
the beach facing the sea, Moore has built and operates a bar-restaurant which
he calls the Teahouse of the Blue Lagoon. This accounts for the confusion
1 between Blue Hole and Blue Lagoon. on the side of the mountain descezding to
the water. Koore has built and lives in a small studio apartment. He also
owns another small house overlooking Blue Hole. This house was occupied temp-
erarily by a girl who was introduced to me as his fiancee. Margot Palzer. and
her mother, Rita Palner. They are supposed to return to their home in Vancouver,
B.C., about the end of June.
.
About five o'clock I introduced myself to Moore as a friend of
Antonio de la Carrera, and gave him the more with the recognition symbol. We
talked from five o'clock until about 7:30 at which time re had dinner auð
parted until the next morning at 11:30.
:
I spent the night at the Bonnie Vue Hotel and noted in passing
that a U. S. destroyer escort based at Guantanamo Bay was anchored in the
harbor for the weekend, with the sailors being given liberty in Port Antonio
This seems to be a common occurrence, and could perhaps be a source of informa-
tion about Cuban patrol practices along the south coast.
Saturday morning, 20 June. met Moore arain. and continued our
discussion of the previous day. During our conversation. he introduced me to
Fred Barrett. a native Jamaican (colored). so is in charge of the operation
of the bar-restaurant. I left Mr. Moore and Blue Hole about 2:00 o'clock and
drove to Kingston, catching the 6:30 Fan American flight back to Miami, via
Montego Bay.
Following my two serious conversations with Voore, plus ey
observations of the mau himself, plus my reconnaissance of the site itself.
I submit the following items of information as being of significance:.
RETURN TO CLA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
:
...

--- Image 104-10165-10004_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
(
on five different occasions. He is reported to be available to serie as
captain on a fishing boat, and to train a crew.
b. The S.S. Frangeline sails every two weeks from Viami
direct to Port Antonio, and could be employed for the delivery of supplies and
even a loat to Robin Moore.
C.
Fred Barrett, manager of the bar-restaurant. seems to
be a very capable man. and for an additional $10 per week added to his regular
pay. would be quite willing to assist any operation.
d.
A Mr. Anthony Gason. a retired British army colonel,
is the Jamaica representative for TROJAN boats, at a place called Turtle Cove,
between Port Autonio and Blue Hole.
e.
The immigration chief for Jamaica is a man by the name,
of George Eubanks. who is the former chief of police at Port Antonio: Moore
claims that they are very close personal friends.
d. Moore is acquainted with a man by the name of Mike Hedges,
who is a nephew of Burke Hedges. the American who becaze Cuba's ambassador to
Chile some years ago.
Mike lives in Kingston, and, if he is not a Battista
The family is re-.
sympathizer. might prove to be a very valuable connection.
ported to be quite wealthy, and would establish an excellent cover.
4. Operational Considerations
a. In order to avoid the use of significant names. I
instructed Voore to refer to Manolo as George King. and the operatios of
landing him in Cuba would be referred to as Operationking. The cost likely
scheme seems to be to establish a suitable boat at Blue Hole. with the cover
story to be that it belongs to Lerican friends of Robin Moore. Housing is
available locally for a limited number of Cutans, with Woore being able to
accommodate up to six on his own property. The local boat captain, George
Munroe. could be employed as captain initially. to train the Cuban crew in
the local marine conditions, as well as serving as an effective cover.
my opinion, it will not be too difficult for persons to enter Jamaica without
difficulty, provided they know a certain minisum amount of English.
In
"
I think a suitable location could be found for radio
transmission and reception facilities on the hills surrounding Blue Hole, but
this would have to be examined by someone skilled in radio techniques. Mateo
would be excellent.
".
In summary, I would say that Robin Moore and his property and!
buildings at Blue Hole would serve as an excellent base of operations. but that
the boat necessary for the operation would have to be acquired and equipped
in the states and shipped down there, except for the remote possibility that
a suitable boat could be found in Kingston. I think a headquarters could be;
established at small cost through lore's good offices, and I think that Rudy
would be a good choice to coordinate the initial operations there.
03.
Jack Reed
[
]
P01-353187
i
;
1/80
Paris Saara forana JavaPlaSET OF TESTERN BAHAN Siniste