

--- Image 104-10171-10229_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10171-10229
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
GIN
i
I
¿CR=L_8
Chief of statim, Mexico
17 - 3-11
Chief, WIT
Aetters for viscussion with Anthony R. PECBAY
en Kove of AKCIG:8 to Mexica
Kons
JEKT RIBS
For PONCHAY
X
The fallowing is in response to your request for a summary of paints test peej
to de clarified in discussions between you sud Station hextes on the fortsevaing
BAPPE of AHCI to Kexico city.
1. Political
A. The requirement that the "overt" offies will emmsist of only three
officiel, the others being "covert", ſan! tis statement that "the presence
of logs AC0A9 in Mexico should not became known and never Rimlitec”.
07. MEXI-5946, 24 July. (commenti It would appear inmeble to cans Ly
with thia requirement if there is to be an overt office and any DAW?
publicity in Maxies or elsesiare, sizes the identities and whereabouts of
a11 ANCIGARmbers will be a matter of public knowledge.)
B. The statement in pars 3, KII-5A) that the Mexican Government
will not be friendly unless a stivities and "plotting to overthrus
Cuban Government“ remia covert. (Comments Since there is to be an overt
office and propaganda department and AKRAP has been, and wili have so
contines to be, described as a proa) organized for the purpose of resoring
the CASTRO &ɔvernment, their reassery propaganda setivitisa tovarò tāta
and camos de cart. Could is be modified to apply only to agreement that
no military invasion would be lounched from laxiest)
-24
Cisayor' so)
Sclarification of the words "established" in the follov.
ing statement by LIEK R?; ...may bevu to disavow NPA: Pazd the effort, should.
fit be established it in empact with dy? in Vexten". (Cament) Vince
24,01 bere vill bo as foret exppet M, te tere davor is andevous.
24
What will const-its-bestablished that KY is in contact with
AMMASPY Certainly we ene expret the charge vill te sale may times by the
Soviets and Scales.)
24
5. Presibility of coding seting to brief demerson
Cuban subversive activities-karteo (para 5, KAI-5553) before arrivEL AL CHAR,
which would undoubtedly be of assistance in obtaining poyular aut esticial
sympathy for Activities.
2. Progin
ye plan to have ARA? pranjauda departoont in Mexico, but it will be
impossible for us to operate effectively, or indeed at all, i
(cant
continues to insist on ACP activities in bexico "remsinics covert) acs set
being pubite or press issue. To feel a tremendous publicity arive desit
be wale througton Latin America at the time of arrival of QA in Psico.
Station sweets will be reedel to a large extent in impering the
public ani polisical climate to all people to work effectively
Also, it is hoped it will be able to guide and support admin, vắc viil
arrive in Nezteo soon to produce one, we will artensibly be
imepondent but actually will be will also mare satirical,
3d tapes for bronsenstice over 2.

--- Image 104-10171-10229_page_2.jpeg ---
4-00000
:
24-8989
3. PM
Requirements set forth DIR-40133, dated 15 July. If permission could
be obtained for use this territory, even if only for Te hours prior and
Euring the rain strike operation, the project vimuld be advanced materially.
4. 91
A. to cancur requirement that TWICKER contact with Station and wit
ANCIGAR be claedection. Head Station's resistance in working out mechanics
of these contacts.
24. Ration's mivice and assistance needed on followingt (1) provision
of unilateral telephone tape/nike installation operational data for AFCIGAR
consumption) (2) protection lateral conegumes) _ of ANCICAR members
against my ant executive ections
(3) E1 cent surveillanta.
to check au security and loyalty of overt/covert ARCIGAR members; (4) selection
of secure safe sites for housing of MCMAR sembers, for overt office, and
for covert meeting sites.
24.
C. Fextem Covert capabilition in terms of protection of overt
ANCIGAR embers against eement executive action operations.
D. Can Station communication facilities (pouch and cable) be used for
BePure AXRAP mications between members in Marico and those in PEPRIME
and elecvtbere?
Distributions
3 - Mexico
3 Amma's 1960
->>
Nexico Desk
1. WH/A/Chrono
Thorpe!
Gratt
OLIVER C. CALDCED
G.
24/4