

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
}"
9
:
RESULTS
TERMINATION
COMMENTS
:
By memorandum dated 2 October 1968,
the Director of Security forwarded
two reports to the DDCI summarizing
the results of the NOSENKO case to
that date. The reports are voluminous.
One was prepared by the Office of
Security and the other by the FBI..
Both reports conclude that NOSENKO
was a bona fide defector. A draft
memorandum attached to this file,
dated 21 October 1968 and prepared
by the CI Staff, raises question
regarding NOSENKO's bona fides
and challenges the above two reports.
NOSENKO continues under contract to
the Agency. He is brought to Washington
periodically to consult on matters
germane to his background and experience.
Various reports are available in the
files of the Office of Security which
detail financial aspects of this case.
No final accounting has been made since
the project continues.
(1) While the Office of Security files
do document the rationale for the original
confinement of NOSENKO, they do not
document the rationale for his continued
confinement over so long a period of time.
A memorandum dated 5 August 1969 states
that various congressional staff officers
were briefed on NOSENKO and states that
concern for his safety, as well as con-
cern regarding his bona fides, prompted
the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6)
(2) Office of Security files document
a period in 1969 during which a ma il
cover was placed on NOSENKO.
(3) During the above period, NOSENKO
was allowed a pleasure trip to Florida.
During this trip, Agency personnel, with
apparent Headquarters approval, obtained
the services of prostitutes. This
apparently occurred on at least two
occasions.
!
2

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10227-10000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
KATLETAL REVIEWED AT CLA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SE LACT COMHTTEL ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME:
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY:
:
TS Material from Deryahía Safe
_ M
DATE
RECEIVED RETURNED
DATE
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME) SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIAL
"
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_100.jpeg ---
14-00000
4. In 1962 you stated that while working with the KGB, you personally
recruited ten Âmericans. Please give us their namen and how you
recruited them,
Note:
Nosenko was asked why he was chosen to go to Geneva in 1962
instead of an officer from the Department (KGB) Delegation.
Answering this question he mentioned the recruitment of ten
Americans.
Excerpts from; Meeting No. 2 with Mosenko
11 June 1962.
Nosenko: Gribanov, the chief of the whole counterintelligence. (His name)
Oleg Mikhaylovicà Gribanov,
•
.
so, Oleg Mikhaylovich Gribanov
decided you go, that I must be here (in Geneva). I said, "Be my
guest, Oleg Mikhaylovich. I am not saying no.
I am not
"So Gribanov
decided "You will go. That's all" (Nosenko knocked on the desk).
Well, what am I?
Who have I recruitted?..
Ten Americans,
no more than that..
•
(and Gribanov said) "You will go! You must go!"
III. Soviet visas and other regulations for tourists traveling to the USSR.
2. 1. Didn't you know or remember how Oswald's visa was processed and
from what country Oswald entered the USSR? Is it possible that he
entered the USSR on a "podvisnaya" visa?
n
✓ 2. You previously said that you saw Oswald's visa application, but you could
not say from what country Oswald came to the USSR. In your opinion, is
it possible that Oswald received his visa application in some other European
country, then went to Finland and through Finland entered the USSR without
contacting the Soviet consulate in Helsinki? Did you hear any talk about the
possibility that is described above? If so, when did you hear it and from
✓
whom?
3. On 3 July 1964 you stated that you have seen Oswald's anketa (visa
application). Do you remember what was in that anketa? Did you read
the anketa? What did you mean that you saw the anketa? Was it in the
naine Lee Harvey Oswald, or was there another name? Did you see the
name of the person who signed the anketa?
3
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_101.jpeg ---
14-00000
in
:
L
4.
Do you have any information to the effect that Oswald might not have
come to the Soviet consulate or to the Soviet Embanny in Helsinki to
obtain his visa? Could he have gbtained a vina in Switzerland or Sweden
then nave come to reisinki and, without reporting to the Soviet consulate
in Helsinki, have taken a train to Leningrad and then to Moscow?
'
5. According to your previous information, "any tourist
-
he luyn a tour
to the Soviet Union, makes out the anketa, and then comes to Moscow."
In what country did Oswald buy a tour to the USSR? In what country did
Oswald fill in the anketa? If the anketa goes to Moscow, to what office
in Moscow does it go? To MID, KGB? Is it possible that all the data on
Oswald from his anketa was sent to Moscow by a cable? Did you see and
read Oswald's anketa or a telegram that Oswald is coming to Moscow?
If you did not read the anketa, who among the KGB officers of the Second
Chief Directorate or the First Chief Directorate read the anketa or had
access to it? Who would logically have access to the anketa?
6. According to your previous information, any person who wants to visit the
USSR has to buy a tour in a foreign tourist firm in his home country or any
other country, and the tourist firm will make arrangements for his stay in
the USSR. It is understood that he must fill in the anketa, and in addition to
the general questions, the common tourist should make requests for the
cities he intends to visit and for the accommodations he wants. The tourist
would know in advance when he receives his visa his date of arrival in
n.
Moscow, in what hotel he is going to stay, and what kind of accommodations
;
:
he would be given. The question, then, is do you know when Intourist
received Oswald's request and application and when it answered him that
his demands are met and that he is welcome in Moscow?
7. From your knowledge, when Oswald arrived in Moscow, was he handled by
the Intourist Agency or by Sputnik, the Youth Tourist Bureau of the USSR,
or by the Central Council for Tourism of the Soviet Trade Unions?
Note:
The Central Council for Tourism of the Soviet Trade Unions organizes
exchanges of tourists between trade unions of the USSR and other
countries. Sputnik was organized in June 1958 for the exchange of
of tourists (students and other youths).
4
"
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_102.jpeg ---
:
I
=
14-00000
:
8.
What is the procedure after a tourist applies for a Soviet vina”
Do you
✓ 7.
know at what tourist agency or in what foreign country Oswald applied..
for a visa to the USSR or bought a tour to the USSR? Whỏ was the
Soviet Intourist representative in that country who took Oswald's visa
application to the Soviet Embassy?
You stated previously that Oswald was not considered a defector. If he
was not a defector, then what was he?
Note: If the KGB did not consider Oswald to be a defector, then it is
possible that Oswald was known to the KGB long before his arrival
in the USSR as a tourist and Oswald was assured that when he
arrived in the USSR he would be given Soviet citizenship or at
least a permanent residence permit. Although he would be a defector
anyway, it could be that Oswald did not like the word defector
and the KGB decided not to call him a defector but, let us say, a
volunteer. The Soviet Constitution states that the USSR grants the
Fright of asylum to all foreign citizens "who are persecuted for
safeguarding the interests of the working class or who are persecuted
for scientific activities, for national-liberation struggle.". (Article
129 of the USSR Constitution of 1936.)
✓ 10. You stated previously that "since about 1960, every Soviet ambassador-
can give a visa in three to five days. If so, what was so special for the
Soviet government that the ambassador would be personally involved in
issuing a visa to Oswald?
Note: It is known that in 1957 the Soviet government adopted some measures
to improve travel for foreign tourists in the USSR. They mostly
concerned currency exchange. The 1957 regulations said nothing
about visas. Nosenko should be questioned about the 1957 decision
of the Soviet government to determine if he is not mistaking the 1957
decision with that of 1960.
11. You stated previously that since about 1960, every Soviet ambassador
can give visas in from three to five days. The available information
published by the Soviets unmistakenly states that a visa cannot be obtained
in less than seven days (in some cases it takes five to seven days). Following
are excerpts from a book entitled Moscow, A Tourists Companion, published
in Moscow in 1969, and from the magazine Soviet Life, May 1978, p. 59.
Soviet Life stated that "visas are issued within 10 days of receipt of
application at a Soviet consulate."
:
;
5

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_104.jpeg ---
14-00000
Ae
prohibited to ship unt
Acoustifica Antiques and ador
provided you of the
Culture and have post
vent of the price
Detaded
inziralty assi
!
'
Exchan
bordo o poor'S AL
Service burPAATS
frours et mensex
•
-
.: P
D
USS R J
.1 mavalled
art may be shy pod out.
in from the Ministry of
lity amounting to fil per
" the fourists. Mema
cadable at all
and toest hutris
abbess and office
" " . fatte
Rules bar Photographers, and Cine camera
tourist, whos foargues the pleasures of pho scaphs in a foreign
1. the
where
alon mas pikat kapt expesites, and every-
save objects avas ng under the head as the man's de.
tence. This applies to all types of military technology, seaports,
major hydrotechnical objects, railway junctions, tunnels, railway
bridges, industrial enterprises, and the like. Aurial photography
atad terrestrial panoramic, photography, and photography within
25 kilometres from the frontier are produbited. Ask for permis-
sion of the administration be you
w your camera înside
at the 11 It stands to reason,
must Srst obtain their
Factories, research in
..
too, that when you pi, ko zgi
consent
If you intend to make
*M!
subsequent showing at cinem
Sovesportfilm (7. Maly ..
tel. 229-32 02g Bear m man
paper, etc
Agfa and is
Latourist Se ·
Every hotel
1
has an Intouen-*
and we advise v 1TH.
and staffed with peo
H
"
mmercial purposes (fot
11. television, cie) apply to
„kovsky Perculok, Moscow).
servative colour materials (films,
Union” are adapted wifely. fur
sewhere in the Soviet Uniun)
Koem. It is very unital to tourists
it on arrival The service Lureaus
who speak foreign languages, and you
will have no difficulty commemunicating with thein.
One of their majut functions is to exchange the vouchers issued
to you by your travel agent for Intourist coupons, and to
provide all other services.
Zixl
Intourist takes care of you
The service bureau will relieve you of all travel cares and book”.
tickets for you on internal and international railway and air-
lines. It will help you extend your visa and perform all other
pertinent formalities
The service bureau books tickets to theatres, concerts, cinemas
and sports comests. Make sure that you book tickets well in
advance, for every Muscovite is an avid theatre-goer and sports-
fan and tickets are scarce.
Te price of a theatre and concert ticket is 2 to 3.50 rubles,
anah of a cum ita ticket 40 to 70 kopeks.
The service, bureau will tell you what is showing at Moscow's
elicattos, comert falls and cinemas,
If your tour does not cover excursions and you wish to see the
sights of Moscow; the service burrau will be glad to recomméiul
the best sightseeing itiner tries.
If you need a guide interpreter, the service bureau will be happy
to provide one. Intourist guides speak English. Bulgarian, Spanish.
Italian, Chinese, Hungarian, German, Polish. Portuguese, Ruman-
ian. Serbo-Croatián. Finnish, French, Czech. Swedish and Jap
anese The services of a guide-interpreto cost up to 3 hours->
rubles, for every subsequent heat-1 rubles 81 kopeks.
You can hire a cat for a sightseeing too of Moscow and
environs or order a “long-distance telegd one call through t
service burcau
If you are unwell, the service bureau will summion a luster ·
you. As you know, medical services in the Soviet Union are t
of charge.
Approach your hote! service bureau with anything that N
interest or trouble you The receptionist will be glad yo,
u” advise you and to render all the necessary assistance
If You Are Passing Through Mose
If you are passing through Moscow and have onte a day i
is what we trusminiend you to see:
1. Excursion by car or tourist mark A three hour tour wit
will give you a general ades of add and new Moscow. The
statis from Hotel National is the heart at
arwi for
:
7
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_105.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
#
231
41. Maurice. Therez Kanbankment (formerly Sophuskaya). Kel
Squate.
Square. along Gorky Street, Sudovige
Kudtso, Kutsatansky Prospekt. Deninsky Prospekt, past Mosons
University on the Home Hills back in the National.
"
2. To the Kundin and Red Square & visit to the Kremlin
cath cleats, and the Armony. The jour. Likes" three hours
11 vegs have another day it. Mosense, he stay to visit the Exhibi-
Whancement of the US.SK. per p. 60).
trea of Leonomic
which will give v
ced the cultural or
"
a cnid idea of contemporary Soviet life
commic achievements of Moscow and the
rest of the Soviet Unit The excursion takes four hours In
The afternoon, pay a visit to the famous Tretyakar Art Gallery
se p. 150), the treasure trove of Russian hoc ait. The excur
on there takes something like three hours.
Do your best, too, to see Moscow's glorious Balthai Theatre
hollet.
1: you have a few mens days in Moscow, pick tours to suit your
· este and inclinations.
Continue Your Trip
o Moscow you can make a tour of the Soviet Union-the
Atopics of the Black Sea coast and the Siberian taiga, the
ka ainian, steppelands, the mountains of the Caucasus, and the
ancient towns of Russia and Central Asia.
here is the list of cities where Intourist offers its services:
ningrad, cradle of the Russian revolution, a city of magni-
ent architecture:
Back Sea health a smitt of Batumi, Odessa, Sochi, Sukhumi and
vian and Fur Fastórn cities:
sibirsk—the largest industrial centre and city of science in
stern Siberia;
sk, a new Siberian town neighbouring on the Bratsk Hydro-
• Station on the Angara, which is one of the world's
**kutsk, the city near the legendary Lake Baikal;
ksbarovsk, a major Soviet Far Eastern city.
8
1,'
A
!

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_106.jpeg ---
i
Additional information on Vis
QUESTION: 1 would like to are un article about
Intourist arrvices, prices, etc. (6. 6. Krause,
Minneapolis, Minnesota; M. Saparof, Peshoro,
Massachusetts; and many other renders)
ANSWER Intourist is out state-operated commercial
travel agency. It works with some 700 firms and trans
port companies in nearly 1000 countries, including about
100 in the United States. Intourist arranges tours for
Soviet citizens abroad and for foreigners in the Soviet
Union. We estimate that 25 million: foreign travelers.
will visit our country between 1976 and 1980 and that
18 million Soviet people will go abroad.
We will deal here only with Intourist services for
foreign travelers. They include sightseeing excursions,
trips to museuras and theaters, meetings with Soviet
workers at factories and farms and with Soviet students,
round tálile discussions and other affairs
Intourist offers almost 20 different kinds of group
or individual tours mulatın,
-
Counting.
fishing, international compo fata
and symposiums, excursions for schoolchildren and
youth, cruises, art festivals and more.
Many visitors coine for rest and medical treatment
at spas in the North Caucasus (Essentuki, Zhelez
novodsk, Kirkkulak Pratigorskt or on the Black Sea
(Sochi, Yalta, Odessa, Such a tour whides a room
at a sanatorium, special diet meals, medical care and
other services,
A new tour called the Russian Language Seminar is
rapidly gaining popularity. Besides seeing the country,
the traveler has a chance to brush up on Russian with
special course 4.
Cost depends on the claw and type of the tour, dis.
tance, season and number of services. Intourist offers &
discount on off season tours, frequently as low as one-
fourth of the full price. There are special cut rates for
youth and student groups, as well as for children.
Entry visas are issued within 10 days of receipt of
applications at a Soviet Consulate. Foreign currency
formalities are limited to declaring your currency at
customs. Intourist also accepts credit cards from
foreign banks and firmns.
Itineraries include 135 cities of the country and are
designed to suit all tastes. You can choose a separate,
republic or the whole country, the Caucasus, -Siberia,
*Central Asia, the Far East, the leading cultural centers,
health resents or ancient het stad stee
For instance, Gener‚' 1
ste of Invarast´s
major U.S. partners, other the following tours:
.
•
1) “Spotlight on Russia and the Crimea"--16 days,
Moscow--Kiev-halta—Leninzrad, price 999 to 1.423
dollars, depending on the city of departure by air to
the Soviet Pupt on the (The cast includes
air fare, hotel arcomniodatiotis –tuuch cheng er f (wn
than for one-three meals a day and guide services)
2) "Destination Black Sea and Caucastis". – 16 dają,
Leningrad - Suchi--Thilis--Yerevan -Moscow, 1,159
to 1,458 dullars.
-
The American Express Company, another major In-
tourist partner, offers a 22-day "The Complete USSR"
tour through Moscow, Hratik, Irkutsk, Taslıkent, Dok.
haza, Samarkand, Hakit and Leningrad, for 1,059 to
2,08% dollars.
Incidentally, if you do plan to come, for more detaila
get in touch with the intourist office:
Vitaliy kuryazhev, Intourist Travel Information, 48
East Forty-nimh Street, New York, New York, 10017.
Telephone: (212) 371-6953.
59
Sean LIFE, May 1975, 257
>
:
00000-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_103.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Formalities
All your wordt but .4
national josssport and“,
visit and the itinerary
Miq. Ax à rule, vivo
hims and til
Visas ate pasuri bo
ated time of
Soviet handler
11
you
10-
...
Soviet-Hursh "is since
.
280 met. Mang the time of your
are adtuned for travellers by tourer
11 +
can get your visa yours 21
r consular offices in every country five
The visa is valid for the indic
1.
E pounts of entry and exit on the
2. leje nding in your route.
decide to extent your visit or alter the itinerary, apply
to the serving bureau at your hotel. If Intourist is able to provide
the nerowary accommodation, your visa will be altered accord-
ingly. Viras, and subsequent alterations in them, are free of
charge
Visas for transit travel via the U.S.S.R. by railway or motor
are issued if you have the pertinent visa of the country neigh
bouring on the U.S.SR. You need no Suvict visa if you travel
248
Intourist takes care of you
via USSR. by air, provided you do not stay in Soviet transfer
towns for murẻ than 24 hours,
Intourist does not service travellers who coine on visits to iela-
tives in the Soviet Union. Neither does it offer services in
towns where Intourist. agencies are unavailable In such cases,
apply to a Soviet consulate abroad.
:
Under reciprocal agreements between the Soviet Union's and
some other countries, no visas are necessary for nationale of
these countries for travel in the U.S.S.R. and for Suvictstourists
visiting these countries. =
shoes tourist and
Medicul Formalities. An internat
international
al smallpox incculation certi
Grate is required for entry to the Soviet Union from African,
Asia
and South American countries, and, in additioal a cholera
certihoite for entry from India and Easteri Pakistan.
Customs. Personal belongingi—garments
sports gear, perfumery and cosmetics, etc in quantities neces-
sary for the time-of-stay/in-the Soviet Union depending on the
seisun, are duty-free. Besides, travellers may bring duty-free.
(per person; two cameras, one amateur cinecamera, and a
reasonable (non-commercial) amount of souvenirs.; Persons com-
ing to the Soviet Union on a hunting fur (provided they have
a certificate issued by Intourist or a foreign travel firm confirm-
ing this purpose of their trip! may bring spating rifles,
To make sure passage home is unhindered, please, register the
foreign currency you have brought with you with the customs,
which will issue you a pertinent certificate.
It is prohibited to bring to the U.S.S.R. Soviet carrency, Soviet
Rovernment bonds, annulled securities, atm.. asian and hashish
and appliatues for smoking them, obscene mate sals, and books,
bluns, recurds, etc., pulitically and counomically prejudicious” to
the US.S.R.
All objects and articles (except those proshut. ·
be shipped out of the USSR. in any que provided they
..
41. !
•
no Law; may
..
red at the
ecies of the
archased with
have been purchased with Soviet minnes
Vneshtorg Bank of the USSR. or the ath i
State Bank of the USSR bank
foreign convertible currency. For the erkunden? | passage of
such goods make sure you have the pert-n-ut bank certificates
er shop's bills
6
1
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_107.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
:
:
12. Some questions about visas could be put to Nasenko based on information
provided in the book, Your Trip to the USSR (A Tourists Manual). The
book is published by Foreign Languages Publication House, Moscow,
Although there is no date of publication in this book, the information
provided in the book strongly suggests that it was published no later
than 1962. The information states that "it should not take more than
-
a week to receive one's visa." The applicant must fill in and sign an
application form (sample enclosed) and enclose three photographs of
passport size as well as a copy of the Intourist or Intourist contractor.
firm voucher to the effect that the applicant has paid the full cost of the
tour. The tourist need not apply to the Soviet consulate in person,
as the tourist firm will take care of the matter.
i
APPLICATION FORM
For Persons Who Wish to Obtain an Entry Visa
the U.S.S.R. or a Transit Visa Through the U.S.S.R.
(Write clearly in ink or type all answers in full)
QUESTIONS
1. Surname name and patronymic
(persons who have more than one
surname, or who have pen nanies,
must list them in full; married
women and widows inust give
their maiden name and their hus
band's surnaine)
2. Date and place of birth
3. Nationality
4 Citizenship. If you, were former-
by a citizen or subject of another
country, indicate foriner citizen.
ship
ANSWERS
present 11
and profess
1 34
10
:
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_108.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
6. Reason for me to the U.S.S.R.,
duration of
and itinerary
Note Persons swing for a trans-
it visa though the USSR. inust
have an
ransit visa of
which or through
please
the
.
S.R.
7. If minors under 16 years of age
aro accompanying you, indicate
the surname, name and patronymn-
ic of each child
Were
:
de USSR.
before: (it 144, indicate when,
where and purpose of stay)
9. Surnames, names, patronymics
and addresses of close relatives
in the US S.R.
10. Your
(day, month, year).
Date
1.35
Signature
i
DOCUMENTS
Visus
To enter and leave
the U.S.S.R., a for-
riyn tourist must
have a valid national
passport and Soviet
entry and exit visas.
It should not take
more than a week to receive one's visa.
Citizens of foreign countries are issued Soviet visas
through Consulate of the U.S.S.R. in their own coun-
try. The applicant must fill in and sign an application i
form (see sampl:; and enclose three photographs of
passport size, as well as a copy of the Intourist or In-
tourist contractor firm voucher to the effect that the
applicant has paid the full cost of the tour. The tourist
need not apply to the Soviet Consulate in person, as the
tourist firm will take care of the matter.
Citizens of Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democrat--
ic Republic, the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, the
Chinese People's Republic, the Korean People's Demo-
cratic Republic, the People's Republic of Mongolia, Po-
land, Rumania and the Czechoslovak Republic have the
right, according to a reciprocal agreement, to enter and
leave the Sovit Union without applying for Soviet visas.
on the basis of their national passports alone.
146
33
!
11
:
:
:
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
FILES
Office of Security files on NOSENKO
are maintained in the following
locations :
OS/SSD (Contact - Mr. Charles Phalen)
OS/SAG (Contact Mr. Bruce Solic)
->
3
:
}

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_109.jpeg ---
14-00000
A person's national passport should not e
the date of his departure from the U.S.S.R.
A Soviet tourist "vesa · is valid for entry into
USSR, and exit during the time specified and is valid
sting the cities enumerated in the visa. A tourist
4. in and leaves the U.S.S.R. only through the hors
an' indicated in he's Soviet visa
1. "
.
Should your plans change unexpectedly, your visa
may be extended, the itinerary alter rand the border
extry and exit points changed without ait, Mittens!
form: dities if Intourist is able to provide accommoda-
tions and transportation to comply with the change. In
all events, you must nouity Intourist of a changs in plans
+few days ahead.
Visitors visas for visiting: relatives in the U.S.S.R.
are granted through two sad channels
a
Group Visas may be resued to tonti 's on cruises and
to large tourist groups travelling together,
Visas
JJI
issued, exte schod, and itineraries and
border-points of euth.
te altered free of
charge.
Transit Visag
sovet transit visas are issued is
natum by Soviet. En ·
hot three days of
sules No So.
*** transit visas are necessity for persons of any na-
tionality flying over the territor, of the U.S.S.R., on
condition that all reservations (of no longer than 24
ours' stay in any given point of change) have been
36
:
made for him along the entire route through the
U.S.S.R. and that the passenger has the right to enter
the next contiguous country,
Health Certificates
Tmatists from Africa, South America and Asia must
have an International Vaccination Certificate, and tour-
ists from India and Eastern Pakistan must have a certifi-
cate stating that they have been inoculated against
: cholera. Tourists from other countries do not need to
present any health certificates and there will be no med-
ical extinct al on
officer -
U.S.S.R. Public Health
al proof of health from
tourists arriving from countries known to have an epi-
demic at the time of arrival.
;
12
37
"
;

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_110.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
× 13.
It would be useful to ask Nosenko his comments on the information on
"Passports and Other Formalities" taken from the book, A Motorist'a
Guide to the Soviet Union by Viktor Louis and his wife Jennifer Louin.
The book was published in Moscow in 1967.
Note: Viktor Louis and his wife are "slightly" known to Nosenko.
30
Motorist's Guide
hand-einbroidered shirt or base (15 roubles upwards); toys; gramophone se
cords (12 in. LP--1 rouble); tees (comparatively inexpensive); traditiona
toks
silver- gilt-and-enamel ware (e.g. tiny förk for lemon or butterballs—1 rouble
'child's spoon with animal handle roubles); wood, alabaster or potter
–3
ornaments.
"t you would like to visit the markets, you should go as early as possibl
in the day. You will be able to find in the market good quality fresh fruit
which is often lacking in the bezels. Also on sale there are honey, fresh eg2
and dairy products; there may be various items of local handwork as well. Th
markets close at 5.00 p.m.
PASSPORTS AND OTHER FORMALITIES
In order to enter and leave the Soviet Union a foreign tourist must have
a valid national passport and a fuviet entry visa. Soviet visas are issues
free of charge usually within a seven-day period from the time of
application to the Soviet Embassy or Consulate in the tourist's own country
The horder points through which the tourist enters and leaves thië Sovie
Union must be those indicated in the Soviet visa.
Foreign touriste' arrivals in the Soviet Union are registered when they firm
hand over their passports at the first Intourist service point indicated on the visa
In addition to Soviet vitas, it is required that the citizens of inost Western
European countries obtain vises for the Communist countries through which
they will drive on their way to and from the Soviet Union: East Germany
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania or Bulgaria; East German visa
are obtainable on entry to that country,
Besides an International Driving Permit, motorists must bring an inter-
national automobile registration certificate of the country of departure, sti.
pulated in the 1926 International Automobile Traffic Convention. Tourists'
cars can be brought into the Soviet Union and taken out again without payment
of duty on condition that the roser gives a written guarantee to take the car
out of the country upon departure. This guarantee is to be handed over to the
customs authorities at the Soviet border.
It is forbidden to bring the following into the Soviet Union:
(a) arms and ammunition
(b) printed matter, films, phagaphs, negatives, drawings, etc. "which are
hostile to the U.S.S.R. in political or economic respects".
Printed matter, plants (frust, seeds, etc.) and animals are liable to inspection
by customs authorities.
It is forbidden to take out of the Soviet Union:
(3) arms and ammunition
:
13

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_112.jpeg ---
....
..
14-00000
1.
13.
1.
(b) A. N. Aksenov is no doubt identical with a Colonel Nikolay
Aksenov with whom, according to Epstein's book, (page 146)
Marina Oswald had an interview in 1961. Aksenov is also
mentioned in McMillan's book (pages 132-133). Aksenov
allegedly said to Marinag; "Tell your husband not to worry....
believe your request will be granted." Also see page 125 of
the same book.
Did you know or know of Arkadiy Denisovich Rudak?
I
Note: Rudak was Deputy Chairman of the KGB during 1959 to 1960 and
might have taken part in the Oswald case while Oswald lived
in Minsk.
Did you know or know of Major General Stepan Alekseyevich Smorodinskiy?
Note: Smorodinskiy was Deputy Chairman of the KGB for Belorussia in
1962 and most likely know about the Oswald case. His name
would most likely appear in the Oswald file.
✓. 5. Do you know Lt. General Vasiliy Ivanovich Petrov?
-
Note: Petrov was KGB Chairman for Belorussia from 1959 to 1973.
Therefore, it would be his agency, the KGB, which would watch
Oswald in Minsk. It is safe to assume that after the assassination
of President Kennedy in 1963, Petrov, as Chairman of the KGB
of Belorussia, would review the Oswald file and send it to Moscow.
He would also have been called to Moscow KGB headquarters to
take part in the preparation of the spravka (summary) of the
Oswald file.
6. What do you know about Lt. General Aleksandr Ivanovich Perepelitsyn?
Note: Perepelitsyn was Chairman of the KGB of the Belorussian Republic
from 1954 to 1959. Nosenko should know him or at least about him.
Nosenko should be asked if Perepelitsyn took any part in the
investigation of Oswald. (Perepelitsyn was Deputy Chairman of
the KGB of the USSR from 1959 to 1967. He died in Moscow.)
7. What part, if any, was played by General Sergey Grigoryevich Bannikov
Note:
in the Oswald case, especially after the assassination of President Kennedy?
Bannikov was mentioned by Nosenko as one of the Deputy Chiefs of
the Second Chief Directorate and later on as one of the Deputy
Chairmen of the KGB of the USSR. From 1968 to 1978, Bannikov
was Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Supreme Court.
v.
Nosenko
->
Nikolayev
1. Can you explain why you went to England and Cuba under the name Nikolayev
and to Geneva using your true name, Nosenko? What would have happened
if some Englishman or English intelligence officer had met you in Geneva
in 1962 or in 1964 and greeted you in the presence of the other delegates
15
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_111.jpeg ---
14-00000
IV.
Belorussian KGB and MVD.
1.
It would be useful to question Nosenko about his knowledge of the chiefn
of the KGB and the MVD in the Belorussian Republic. A list of names
follows:
KGB and MVD Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs of the Belorussian SSSR.
Chiefs
Lt. General Lavrently Fomich Tsanava
-
NKVD, MGB (State Security) 1941-1953.
:
1
->>>
. Maj. General Mikhail Ivanovich Baskakov MVD 1952-1954.
Lt. General Aleksandr Ivanovich Perepelitsyn - KGB (State Security) 1954-1959.
Aleksandr Nikiforovich Aksenov
Lt. General Vasiliy Ivanovich Petrov
->
-
MVD 1960-1965.
KGB (State Security) 1959-1973.
Lt. General Yakov Prokopyevich Nikulkin - KGB (State Security) 1973-
Deputies
Maj. General Aleksandr Ivanovich Perepelitsyn MVD 1952-1954
-
-
KGB (State Security) 1959-
Arkadiy Denisovich Rudak
Aleksandr Nikiforovich Aksenov - KGB (State Security) 1959-1960.
Maj. General Stepan Alekseyevich Smorodinskiy - KGB (State Security) 1962-
Ivan Leopoldovich Lysakovskiy - KGB (State Security) 1971-
2. What do you know about Aleksandr Nikiforovich Aksenov?
Note: (a) Aksenov was Deputy Chairman of the KGB of Belorussia
from 1959 to 1960. It is assumed that when Oswald arrived
in Minsk in January 1960, Aksenov was Deputy Chairman of
of the KGB and would definitely know about the Oswald case.
From 1960 to 1965, Aksenov was MVD Minister of Belorussia.
Therefore it would be under his direction that Oswald's passport
and the departure of Oswald and Marina from Minsk was
arranged. If Nosenko had access to Oswald's file, he must
know about Aksenov. From 1965 to 1971, Aksenov was First
Secretary of the Vitebsk Obkom of CP Belorussia, and since
1971, Aksenov has been Second Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Belorussian CP. He has been a member of
the CC CPSU since 1976, and he is also a deputy to the USSR
Supreme Soviet. On May 9, 1978, Aksenov arrived in Columbia.
He headed the Soviet delegation on the invitation of the Columbian
Communist Party.
14
i
:
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_113.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
!
:
with the words, "Oh, Mr. Nikolayev! How are you? I remember you.
You visited England with the team of boxers."
VI
GRU (Military Intelligence)
1. From where did you learn that the GRU was not informed about Oswald's
presence in the USSR? Wouldn't the GRU officer in Intourist, whom you
mentioned earlier, have known about Oswald's presence in the USSR?
Did you ever hear that Oswald possibly had contact with the Soviet
intelligence during his service in Japan?
2. You stated previously that there was no information that Oswald offered
to give information on the US Marine Corps. You did not read the file.
Then how do you know this to be the case? How do you know that the KGB
and GRU made no attempt to debrief Oswald about his service in the
US Marine Corps?
3. Previously you mentioned one Colonel Voloshin as an officer of the
Defense Ministry of the USSR. Can you provide any additional information
on this Voloshin? Could it be possible that he was a KGB officer instead
of in the Defense Ministry?
Note: (a) According to Epstein's book, one Pavel T. Voloshin was an
administrator at Patrice Lumumba University and was a KGB
officer who accompanied a group of Russian dancers to Los Angeles
in 1959 at just about the same time that Oswald was making
weekend trips there to
arrangements for his get his passport and possibly to make other
trip to Moscow. A few weeks after Oswald
decided to return to the United States, he received a letter from
Patrice Lumumba University signed by Voloshin. (page 111)
(b) P. D. knew one KGB officer by the name of Voloshin (first
and middle name forgotten) who used to work in SMERSH
(military CD) and later in the late 1940's and beginning of the
1950's in S & T Department of the KGB.
VIL Marina.
1. 1. From where did you pick up the information that Marina was a "simple.
obyvatel" (a politically unaware person) and that she was not anti-Soviet
if you did not read the Oswald file?
16
T

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_116.jpeg ---
14-00000
<
401
:
3.
14.
You previously stated that the reason that there were no difficulties in
in the way of Marina's marriage to a foreigner and her departure from.
the Soviet Union was because Oswald was already living and working in
the Soviet Union. How would the KGB have reacted to Oswald's marriage
if they hail known that Obald wrote a letter to the American Embassy
before his marriage about his desire to return to the United States?
desire
15. Did you know that Oswald asked the American Embassy for permission
to return to the United States before he married Marina?
VIII.
Nosenko and Oswald case file._
✓ 1. Describe in detail your personal involvement with Oswald and with the
Oswald case from the day Oswald arrived in the USSR to the day of his
departure from the USSR. What positions in the KGB did you personally
hold at that time?
2. Describe in detail your personal involvement with the Oswald case after
the assassination of President Kennedy from 23 November 1963 to the day
of your defection to the US.
↓ 3.
3. In what activities were you involved in connection with the Oswald case and
the assassination of President Kennedy while you were in Geneva at the end
of 1963 and the beginning of 1964? Name any Soviet diplomats or officers
of Soviet intelligence (KGB, GRU) with whom you discussed the Oswald
case and the death of the American President in Geneva.
4. Are you sure that there was no file on Oswald in the KGB before he.
arrived in the USSR? How do you know this? Did you personally check it?
¡ 5.
5. You previously told American authorities that on the cover of Oswald's
file "there definitely was a 'klichka'." But you said you did not remember
the klichka. Do you remember
A whether the klichka was one word or two. As you did not read the file,
is it possible that it was an old file, opened a few years previously by
the First Chief Directorate or by the GRU?
:
:
19

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_114.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
2.
3.
You stated previously that Marina was an obyvatel, Do you have any
comments on the following: "We knew each time you had a date. 110
knew when you applied for your marriage license. We knew the date of
"
3.
your wedding. These were the words of the Komsomol secretary in
Minsk when Marina was expelled from the Komsomol.
Do you have any comments on Marina's statement when she said,
"Our governinent (Soviet) knows every move I make." She make this
comment shortly after her expulsion from the Komsomol.
✓ 4. Did you know that while in Minsk Marina belonged to a group of youths
who gathered together to listen to Voice of America and BBC? Would
that be enough for the KGB to have Marina in its card files? Is it
possible that Marina was the KGB agent reporting on them?
L'
5. You stated that if Marina had been recruited by the KGB, you would
know about it and it would be in the file. But you did not read the file.
How then do you know that she was not recruited?
✓ 6. You said that among Marina's relatives there was an officer of the Minsk
Militia, a Lt. Colonel. Do you have any comments on Marina's
revelation that her real father was a traitor and that he was shot? If
her father was a traitor and he was shot, would his name be in the KGB
v
card file? Would the name of Marina's mother be in the KGB card file
as the wife of a traitor? Is it then possible that Marina's name also
would be in the KGB card file somewhere?
✓ 7. You stated previously that KGB had no interest in Marina prior to her
meeting Oswald and that the KGB investigated her only after Oswald
applied for permission to register marriage with Marina. How do you
know that? Did you read a special file on Marina? Marina revealed
lately that while she was living in Leningrad in 1958 or 1959, she met
a diplomat from Afghanistan who lured her to his hotel room and tried
to make love to her. Do you think the KGB in Leningrad would know
-
about this diplomat and whom he lured to his hotel? Is it possible that
17
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_117.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
"
You stated previously that nobody from the KGB had an interest in Oswald,
but Oswald admitted that he had been interviewed by officials of the MVD
(or KGB) at least twice on his arrival in the USSR and again before his
departure. What was said about these interviews in the Oswald file or
in the summary (sprayka) of Oswald's file? Do you know the names of
the people who talked to Oswald? Was it the KGB, MVD, or both?
7. What do you know about the "Intourist guide" Rosa Agafonova who
visited Oswald in his hotel room shortly after his arrival in Moscow?
8. Did you personally know Rimma Shirokova, the Intourist guide or
interpreter? Was she a KGB officer or KGB agent working for Intourist?
Was there a report in the Oswald file that Rimma Shirokova. sent two
postcards to Oswald in Minsk from some vacation places in the south
1 of the USSR? Did you know that Rimma Shirokova visited Oswald in
Minsk? (See Epstein's book, page 124.)
Note: Oswald and Shirokova allegedly talked about the possibility of
Oswald studying at Patrice Lumumba University in Moscow. It
also should be noted that Shirokova visited Minsk shortly after
Oswald and his wife Marina decided to go to the United States.
9. How did you know that Officer Krupnov wrote a request and opened a case
file on Oswald? Did you see when Krupnov was writing it? Did you read
the request or hear about it from somebody? If you saw it, who approved
and sanctioned the request? If the KGB had no interest in Oswald, then
why was a file opened?
10. Previously, on many occasions, you stated that the KGB had no interest
in Oswald, that he was not normal, and that he should leave the country.
Who among the KGB junior and senior officers made the decision that the
KGB had no interest in Oswald and that he should leave the country?
Describe in detail how you learned about it, from whom, from what
documents, and when.
11. How did you know that there was no microphone in the Hotel Berlin room
where Oswald stayed? Did you personally check the room before Oswald
arrived?
1
•
:
20
A

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_118.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
12. You stated that no KGB officer was ever in contact with Oswald, How
could you make such a statement if you did not read the file? You were
not responsible for it, and, according to your information, you did not
visit Minsk to study the Oswald case.
Note: Oswald's diary clearly shows that most of the students he met were
most likely not students at all. They were more likely KGB officers
under cover as students.
13. You stated previously that it was Officer Krupnov who wrote a request
and opened the case file on Oswald, which was later sent to Minsk.
Name other officers who participated in making the decision to open
the file, who handled the file, and who sent the file to Minsk. What
part did you personally play in Oswald's case while Oswald was in Moscow?
14. You stated previously that the Second Chief Directorate of the KGB was
not interest in Oswald because it was concerned only "with internal
matters." Isn't it true that the Second Chief Directorate is the internal
counterintelligence organization and is responsible for foreigners who
enter the Soviet Union for any reason? Isn't it true that the tourist
department of the Second Chief Directorate is responsible for foreign
tourists such as Oswald? Then why wasn't the Second Chief Directorate
interested in Oswald? Do you see any contradictions in your statement?
15. You stated that there was no attempt made to exploit Oswald for
propaganda purposes, such as Radio, Moscow broadcasts, TV, lectures,
etc. How do you know this? Do you have any comments on the following:
"On October 19 (1960), Lee (Oswald) was interviewed in his room at the
Hotel Berlin by a correspondent of Radio Moscow, Lev Setyayev, who
was ostensibly seeking his impressions as a tourist to use in propaganda
broadcasts overseas. "
Was there an officer in the KGB by the name of
Setyayev? Was this interview organized by the KGB?
16. Do you have any information that Oswald might have been met in
Leningrad by Intourist and then made all the arrangements to go to Moscow?
21 *

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_115.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
✓
S.
Marina was already a RGB agent and she was directed to lure the
diplomat to the hotel? In either case, the KGB would definitely know
about Marina and if she was used by the KGB as a bait for foreigners,
A
might she have already been an experienced KGB agent?
You stated previously that you saw Oswald's file only briefly and you
Then how would you know that Marina wag novor
read only a summary.
used by the KGB? Did you personally make a direct check on whether or ·
not Marina was a KGB informant?
9. In your previous testimony, you categorically denied that Marina was a
KGB-MVD agent or informer. Do you have any comments on Marina's
statement to Life Magazine that she was a "Soviet agent"? Is there any
possibility that the KGB or MVD in Belorussia or in Leningrad, where
Marina had lived previously, had recruitted her as an agent or informer
and she continued to work for the KGB or the MVD until her departure to
the US? Did you have any information about the possibility that there was
another file in the KGB on Marina, a file for an agent or informer of the
KGB or MVD? If such a file existed, it must be reflected in the Oswald
file, as well as in the summary which you read.
10. Did you hear or know that while in Leningrad Marina dated one Oleg
Tarussin, a student who had ambitions to enter the Soviet diplomatic
service and who had some trouble with the authorities over a minor
11.
political incident?
Was there any information in Oswald's file to show that after Oswald.
married Marina, Marina was in the hospital for about five days?
12. What do you know about Marina's vacation in Kharkov shortly after
she married Oswald?
Note: She may have been in Moscow instead of Kharkov.
13. Did you know that while in Minsk Oswald was in the Fourth Clinical
Hospital for surgery on his adenoids? (Oswald got special attention from
the doctors.)
Note: Marina's Aunt Valya, whose husband was an MVD Colonel, sent
eggs to Oswald while he was in the hospital.
1
18
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_119.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
17
Who told fntourist that there was no KGB interent in Onwald?
What
V
in the name of the officer and his department who did no? While in
Moscow, Oswald was interviewed by at least three American correspondents.
Is it your opinion that the Second Chief Directorate was not interested to
find out why Onwald talked to these newspapermen and who they were?
Isn't that part of the KGB's responsibilitios?
18. According to your statement, Oswald was not considered normal, Who
determined that he was not normal? How many doctors, from what
institutions, concluded that Oswald was not normal? The Second Chief
Directorate and Intourist officers could not conclude that Oswald was
abnormal without medical expertise.
19. If Oswald was abnormal, then why did Soviet authorities, for example,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, not inform the American Embassy about
it?
Note: In his previous interrogation, Nosenko hesitated in answering these
questions.
✓ 20. You stated previously that Oswald was in the hospital, the hospital said
that Oswald was not normal, and there was no action taken to inform the
American Embassy. How do you know all of this without reading the
Oswald file?
21. Why do you think that the American Embassy would not have taken Oswald
if he had been turned over to them? Do you know that any Soviet
government office contacted the American Embassy and informed them
about Oswald's presence and the suicide attempt in Moscow?
n.
✓ 22. Was the only reason that the Soviet Government did not inform the
-
American Embassy of Oswald's alleged suicide attempt that it was feared
that he might try it again?
23. You stated that there was no psychological assessment of Oswald by the
KGB nor by the hospital, and that there was no report of that nature,
You did not read the file. You read only summaries.
Then how could
you know that there was no such report? How long was the summary--
:
100 pages?
22
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_120.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
I
24.
Do you know when,and by whom a stateless passport was issued to
Oswald? Where was it issued? Are stateless passports usually
issued by the MVD on the recommendation and approval of the KGB?
What would happen if the MVD issued a stateless passport without
KGB knowledge or if the KGB was against it?
25. You stated previously that the KGB considered Oswald to have retained
his American citizenship while he was in the Soviet Union. Do you have
any comments on the fact that after his arrival in the USSR, and after
having made oral requests for Soviet citizenship, he returned to the
American Embassy, denounced his US citizenship and threw out his
American passport to the American Consul at the Embassy.
Do you think the KGB monitored Oswald's conversations with the
American Consulate officers or received reports from the American
Embassy (from Soviet employees there or Soviet agents there) about
Oswald's denunciation of US citizenship? Did the KGB instruct Oswald
to denounce his American citizenship at the American Embassy before
he would be permitted to apply for Soviet citizenship?
26. You stated that the decision to give Oswald a stipend was made by the
Red Cross. Explain in detail how the Red Cross learned that Oswald
arrived in the USSR. Who informed the Red Cross that there was an
American who needed help? Why was it decided to give help from the
Red Cross and not from the Trade Union? It is understandable that
Oswald might not have had enough money to start a new life in the USSR,
but he was not a poor beggar who needed to be turned to the Red Cross
•
instead of the Trade Union. How did you find out that it was the Red Cross
that made the decision? According to available information, the Red
Cross does not assign money to anybody without the recommendation of
some other Soviet office. Which office was it: the KGB, MVD, the
Council of Ministers, Intourist, or the USSR Supreme Soviet? Who
23

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_121.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
;
;
V
27.
started it first"
Who made the decision on the amount to pay Qawald?
Why was it decided to pay him 700 rubles a month instead of 500 or
1000? What was your salary as a KGB officer? Approximately
A
400 rubles a month, new mony" Isn't it true that Oswald received
more than you did?
If it was decided by the KGB officers and by Soviet doctors that Oswald was
abnormal, then why was he permitted to marry a Soviet citizen?
Note: According to Soviet law, in every union republic, including
Belorussia, the "marriage cannot be permitted between persons
if one of them is pronounced a mental case or imbecile."
Did you have any information that the Minsk KGB reported to Moscow
headquarters Oswald's intention to marry a Soviet citizen, in this case,
Marina?
✓ 28. You stated previously that Oswald's file was sent to the Second Directorate
of the Belorussian KGB. How do you know that it was sent specifically
to the Second Directorate and not to the KGB chairman or his deputy
with a special instruction?
29. What do you mean "to keep an eye on him" (Oswald)? That, according
to your words, was the instruction from the Seventh Department of the
Second Chief Directorate to the Belorussian Second Directorate of the KGB.
30. You stated that there was no visible surveillance of Oswald, there was no
microphone in his apartment, but you stated his mail was monitered and
that there were agents around Oswald in places where he worked and lived..
Explain. how you learned about it. Do you know tha names of any
agents who reported on Oswald? If you did not read the file on Oswald,
how could you know about it?
31. Previously you stated that Oswald was handled no differently than any
The only difference was that he was not
other American defector.
If this was
to be allowed to stay, and he was considered to be abnormal."
the only difference, and it is quite a big one, then why was he allowed to
stay in the USSR? If Oswald was "not normal" according to the KGB
officers, then this should be noted in the Oswald file which was sent to
i
24

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
EVE ONLY
2 April 1964.
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT:
Discussion with Deputy Attorney.
General on Nosenko Case
1. Nr Helms, Mr. Houston and Mr. Nurphy met with
the Deputy Attorney General and members of his staff to
discuss subject case. Present from Mr. Katzenbach's.
staff were Messrs. Foley, Yeagley and Reis.
2. Mr. Helms explained the Nosenko case briefly
and indicated that shortly we would be faced with what
we at least considered to be two problems on which we
would like the advice of the Department of Justice.
First, wo would seoon feel compelled to begin hostilo
interrogation of Nosenko in order to arrive at the truth
with respect to his mission for the KGB and we wondered
what the legal position would be in circumstances in
which we datained Nosenko against his will for this pur-
poso. Second, we would have to be ready after determin-
ing that we could obtain no additional information from
Nosenko to deport him. We had thought of taking him to
Germany and transferring him to Soviet custody in Borlin
where this has been done a number of times in the past.
3. There was some discussion of whether deportation
to another country might be a consideration. Mr. Helms
explained we would probably face publicity problems in
deporting to a third country of the kind we would en-
counter if he were free in the U. S. Nr. Hélas noted
there were many items of information which we and the
FBI realize are of no significance because of the file
holdings we have but which an unscrupulous newspaper man
could use to create mischief. This aspect was then dropped
and it was the consensus that Berlin was probably the best
place.
4. The question of the basis for detention was again
raised and related by Mr. Foloy to the conditions under
- which Nosenko is in this country. He is here as an "ox-
clusion and parole case" which means he has not been
admitted and has been paroled to the Agency which is
responsible for his while he is in this country. This
SECRET
EVES ONLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_122.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
;
the Belorussian KGB. Therefore, the KGB and MVD in Belorussia knew
about it. Then how and why was Oswald permitted to have a shotgun
which he kept in his apartment in Minsk?
✓ 32. Do you have any information that while in the USSR, especially during
V
the year 1960-1961, Oswald might have been visiting Cuba?
Note: Nosenko claimed that during October-November 1960, he (Nosenko)
went to Cuba with a group of STATE PLANNING COMMISSION'S
METALURGISTS headed by Ivan Strigen. He stayed in Cuba for
two months.
33. Do you have any comments on the statement made by Marina's uncle,
the MVD colonel: "I thought that Alik (Oswald) had not only given up
his American citizenship but had become a citizen of the USSR."
Note: The question is that if an MVD colonel thought or could be fooled
by the KGB that Oswald was a Soviet citizen, it is possible that
he really was a citizen or that the KGB spread the rumor that he
was.
34. What do you know about Oswald's association with the Foreign Language
Institute in Minsk?
35. To your knowledge, what KGB, GRU, and other intelligence schools
or training courses were in Belorussia during your work with the KGB?
36. What do you know about Oswald's application to attend Patrice Lumumba
University in Moscow? Why was Oswald denied entrance to the University?
Note: At that time, Colonel Yerzin, senior KGB officer, was a
deputy director of Patrice Lumumba University. (P.D.)
37. Did you know that Oswald took with him to the American Embassy
a letter from his friend Ziger in Minsk? Oswald left that fetter at the
American Embassy.
38. What do you know about the fact that Oswald, while in Minsk, received
39.
American magazines and other publications? Do you think the KGB knew
about it?
Did you know that Oswald was helped to study Russian at the Minsk plant
by one of his co-workers and by one of his friends, Erich, and by a girl
at the Foreign Language Institute? Do you know the names of those people?
25
:
I
!

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_124.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
45.
You stated that when the file on Oswald arrived from Minsk, you,
together with other officers looked quickly through the file, then senior
officers Fedoseyev and Matveyev of the First Department of the Second
Chief Directorate took the file and you never saw it again. Because the
file was in your department only 20-30 minutes (in other places Nosenko
said 35-40 minutes), the S pravka could not be written in such a short
time, and because the file was taken away to the higher authorities of
the Second Chief Directorate and to the KGB chairman, you had no chance
to see the second Spravka. Then again the question is which summary
did you read--the second or the first or both? Describe in detail how
long the summary was, what was in it, and how long it took for you to
read-it. Did-you-make any notes from the summary in case later on you
had to report the "facts" to US intelligence?
46. What do you know about Oswald's visit (from Minsk) to the American
Embassy in Moscow on July 8, 1961?
Note: Oswald flew from Minsk to Moscow allegedly without permission
from the Soviet authority.
What do you know about Marina's visit to Moscow on July 10, 1961?'
What part did the KGB play in the arrangements of Marina's visit to
the American Embassy in Moscow without checking her papers and
without stopping her at the gates. In what hotel in Moscow did Oswald
and Marina stay at that time?
✓47. You stated previously that the First Chief Directorate provided no
information about Oswald before Oswald went to Mexico. What
information did the First Chief Directorate give to the Second Chief
Directorate before he went to Mexico? Did you read this information?
If you did not personally read it, then how did you learn the contents of
the First Chief Directorate information? Who from the First Chief
talked
Directorate particularly to the officers of the Second Chief Directorate
and with whom did they talk?
i
I
27
Y

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_125.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
48. How did you learn what Oswald said at the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City?
Who told you that Ogwald wanted to return to the USSR? Was this written
In the summary?
* F
28
:
I
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_123.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
j
40.
41.
12.
What do you know about Oswald's association and friendship with foreign
students in the USSR in Minsk and Moscow? Do the names Mary Louise
Patterson and Mrs. Roberto, Camacho mean anything to you?
What do Oswald's files show about his contacts with Cuban students in Minsk?
Note: McMillan's book stated that Oswald began to seek out the Cuban
students in Minsk, of whom there were 300 or so, to learn what
he could of Castro's revolution. (See page 127.)
You stated previously that Oswald was a poor shot and that during his
hunting trips he did not kill anything. Was this information in the summary
you read?
:
Do you have any comments on the fact that according to the
Warren Commission Report and the records of Oswald's service in the
Marines that he, Oswald, was a sharp shooter and marksman? 'Was
the "fact" that Oswald was a poor shot mentioned in the summary?
43. You stated previously (27 and 29 July 1964) that you saw the file on
Oswald only briefly and that the file was at the Seventh Department
for only 35-40 minutes. Then how do you know that nobody in the
}
Soviet Union, including KGB officers, ever sat down with Oswald and
got all the information on Oswald? Was everything that you told to
US authorities about Oswald picked up from the summary during those
35-40 minutes?
44. Describe in detail how you and other officers of the Seventh Department
of the Second Chief Directorate worked together on writing the first
Spravka (summary) on Oswald. You also stated that this spravka
(the first one) was prepared in Moscow before the Oswald file from Minsk
arrived in Moscow. What material did you use in preparing the spravka?
Was there another file on Oswald in Moscow or was it a control file
(Kontrolnoye delo)?
Note: In important cases the real file is in the place where the subject
lives and works. In this case, the Oswald file was in Minsk.
Moscow would have an almost identical file on the subject for
control purposes and for instructions on how to handle and
develop the case, This headquarters file is called the Control
File. This file exists on the person who is already an agent or
who is under development or training.
26
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_126.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐ UNCLASSIFIED
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
SUBJECT: (Ophonell
FROM:
CONFIDENTIAL
☐ SECRET
KOUTING AND RECORD SHEET
Rodger S. Gabrielson
OLC/C&R
TO, (Offer designation, room number,
building)
EXTENSION
NO
REF TO: Con. No. TS191722
1133 Dall
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
RECEIVED
POITWARDED
19 June 1978
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom.
whom. Drow a line across column after each comment;}
Mr. N. Shepanek.
1.
MAN DHANGY*%&\
SA/DO/O Tube:
Tube: **6-Green
2.
Mr. Jack Sullivan
86
Tube Ex
3.
g
4.
3.
6.
Hiwinger
weldt
Mr. Habve Emery
7.
Red goi
Haboralse
c
8.
Attached is a letter-
from the House Select
Committee on Assassinations
dated
as
Please respond as soon as
possible.
Shep: Please have CI look
at this. It's the T.S. material
from Deryabin's safe
by Blakey. Thanks,
-
requestori
Rodge
(it z: cistaff
n
days la
5%
Re.
To Blakey.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
i
14.
15.
FORM
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
☐ SECRET
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
☐ UNCLASSIFIED
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_128.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOP SECRET
UNCLASS' LED when blank--TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document-Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in form is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
Source
Doc. No.
..
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Doc. Date
All
Copy No.
SR
XAAZ-17241/1
11 MAY 1964
# Repro 2.
28
Number of Pages
Number of Attachments
11
409
REGISTRY
CIA Control No.
191722A__
S
Date Document Received
E
15 JUN
_1970
C
Logen By
R
E
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on top of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi-
lied Top Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA. Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official duties relate to the matter. Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret material will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left-
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handing in the right-hand columns.
REFERRED TO
Office
DDP(TSCO)
②
RECEIVED
Signatur
inating.
Ⓡ bigg
DC=10LC Hailor 15 Jone
Self Briefernitye
RELEASED
Date
Time
Date
Time
1075
Signature
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
BAD0/1500 B.L..
1215
The pane
JH/00/0
AC/Ci(1208)
DC1/04C
Breckenridgeer
3. Swigg
eer Gabrielson
19 ;
19.
UN
1078
UN
200
JUN
181973
19. 15
15 198
75
201970
JUN
2000/100
TO
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form is detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in the appropriate spaces below and trans.
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
DOWNGRADED
. DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CLA)
TO
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OP-1)
TOP SECRET
BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
"
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
AND DECLASSIFICATION
DATE
(40)

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_129.jpeg ---
14:00000
·TOP SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED when blank-TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document---Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filed in form is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUND
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Source
Doc. No.
Doc. Date
Copy No.
SR/CI/K
XMAZ-17241/2
19 MAY 1964
#Repro 2
Number of Pages 22
Number of Attachments
REGISTRY
P
CIA Control No.
TS# 191722B
Date Document Received
S
E
15 1070
Logged By
B
JUN
R
E
W-
ATTENTION. This form will be placed on top of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi-
fred Top Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official Juties relate to the matier. Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret material will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left-
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right hand columns.
REFERRED TO
Office
DDP(TSCO)
DC=/04
RECEIVED
Signatu
3. Twigg
Scott Breckenridge
PC7/06 C order 15 five
RELEASED
Date
Time
Date
Time
1 73
Signature
-
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
T
DDO/ESCO B.
1/2/15
B. Liga
19407
1970
To
197
75
The pane/prenck 197
41/00/0
Acki (mcy)
ADDO/SCO
DCI/OCC
B. Swigg
Breckinridge or Gabrielson
DDO/Fido
2018033
23 UN
-
1
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form is detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in 'he appropriate spaces below and trans.
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
TO
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-66
DOWNGRADED
DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OF 1)
TOP SECRET
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CIA)
TO
BY
Signature).
DATE
OFFICE
GROUP 1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
AND DI CLASSIFICATION
DATE
(40)

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
SECRET
EYES CY
parolo can be interpreted to mean parole to a specific
locale which would provide some justification for our
detaining him for questioning. It was then pointed out,
however, that if he said he wished to leave the country
to return to the Soviet Union, technically we would not
be able to detain hip further. In this event, we would
bo faced with the need to deport him quickly and quietly
and for this purpose, the immigration warrant of arrest
and deportation was probably the best instrument.
5. Mr. Katzenbach asked Mr. Foley to check into
this and Mr. Foley will in turn contact Mr. Houston.
Mr. Houston will in turn discuss the problem with CIA
Office of Security officials to get the background of
their liaison with the INS on these matters,
6. Mr. Helms thanked. Mr. Katzenbach for his assistance
and we departed amid some jovial banter with respect to
"The Spy Who Came in From the Cold" about what we expected
to happen to him when he started to climb over that "wall"
in Berlin.
.
:
:
David E. Murphy
Chief, SR Division
SPORET
SELLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_127.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOP SECRET
UNGLASSIFIE(), whiến biạnk --TOP SECHO ( when attached to Top Secret Document----Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in form is detached from controlled dururnent
Source
Dix Aus
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
D. Date
Copy No.
SR/CI/K
KAAZ-17241
20 APR 1964
# Repro 2
Number of Pages 38
Number of Attachments
REGISTRY
CIA Control No.
TS# 191722
Data Document Received
15 AU
E
10:9
C
Logged By
R
ATTENTION This form will be placed on top of and attached in each Top Secret daryment received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi.
hed Top Secret within the CIA and will remain affached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destrayed, or transmitted outside
of CIA Arcase to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official duties relate to the matter. Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Sacral material will sign this form and indicate perind of cusindy in the left.
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right hand columns.
REFERRED TO
Coffice
|DDP(TSCO)
RECEIVED
Signature
B. Bigg
DCI 10LC Klintes 15. Jua
Scots Bricknridge
DDO/15
DDOLEDO B. Longg
1215
9/00
M
/01/10)
DO/ESCO.
800/1500 B. Ligg
RELEASED
Time
Date
15107
19
1678
19
9/june 74
78.19
201070
2018**
DCI/OUS un fenoler four
Breckinridge or stabiilson
ONDO/TSCO
TO
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this fo
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for si
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
DOWNGRADED
DATE
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OP I)
complete
Signature
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
spaces below and trans.
When finished with these documents return
them to DDO/TSCO as we are the control Office
for these documents.
TS 191722
TS# 191722A
TS 1917228
TS: 191722C
| (40)
E
T
TOP SECRET
EYES
EYES ONLY
LATEST VERSION
Lived in Nikol
į
Entered "zero"
1938
une
Trg
with parents whe

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_130.jpeg ---
14-00000:
TOP SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED when blank-TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document--Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in fornt is detached from controled document.
"
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Source
C/SR
Doc. No. CSC1-3/781,491
Doc. Date 19 May 1964_
Copy No.
#Repro 2
2
Number of Pages
Number of Attachments
REGISTRY
CIA Control No.
TS# 191722C.
Date Document Received
15 JUN
S
E
1970
C
Logged By
B
R
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on the of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi-
fied Top Secret within the CIA and will reman attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA. Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official duties relate to the matter Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret material will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left.
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right-hand columns.
REFERRED TO
Office
RECEIVED
DOPTSCO: B. Bigg
DCI/O
It's sure to fore
Scott Buckinridge
RELEASED
Date
Time
Date
Time
15070
Signature
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
T
300/500 B. Langg
15215
Slope
pans
ALKI(m(COY)
200/150 B. Swigg
19 UN
978
15 AU
190cm 78
17
one Bo
20\U
20 UN
1978
DCIOLO
Stickincidyeur
or Gabrielsen
2000/7500
FN
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form is detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in the appropriate spaces below and trans-
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
TO
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
DOWNGRADED
DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OP 1)
TOP SECRET
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CIA)
TO
BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
GROUP 1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
AND DECLASSIFICATION
DATE
(40)

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_131.jpeg ---
14-00000
DEFECTORS NOSENKO
-
TAS
TITLE
1
Report on: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko, Soviet
DATE
2 Apr 64
Attachments:
1. Memo for Record from David E. Murphy, Subject:
Discussion with Deputy Attorney General on
Nosenko Case
2 Apr 64
2. Memo for Director of Security from Lawrence R.
Houston, Subject: Parole Status of Defectors
3. Memo. Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
Letter for Mr. Richard Helms from J. Walter
Yeagley, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko
Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrell from Richard
Helms, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
(Forms 1-125 and ba dkground data attached)
Letter for Mr. Louis Wienckowski from Frank E.
Bartos, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nossenko
3 Apr 64
Jan 75
20 Oct 69
9 Oct 69
24 July 69
Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrell from Victor R.
White, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO
18 Jul 69
Routing Sheet from Chief, SR Division to
DD/OS
13 Feb 64
Memo for Mr. McGeorge Bundy from Thomas H. Karamessines, 11 Feb 64
Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko
Memo for US Intelligence Board Members from Marshall 12 Feb 64
S. Carter, Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko
Newspaper clipping: Nosenko's Account Disputes
Charge by Soviet
Newspaper clipping: U.S. Lets Swiss and Red Envoys
talk to Defector
15 Feb 64
:
4. Mano for Acting Chief, Support Branch from Jack
M. Bauman
Mero for Special Agent in Charge District Field
Office from Victor R. White, Subject: LESNIK, George
M. (Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody of)
5.
12 May 64
10 Jul 64··
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_132.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
/ 2
. 2
3
TAB
TITLE
Memo for Headquarters from John D. Noble, Jr.,
Subject: LESNIK, George M. (Emergency Instructions
Regarding Custody Of) with Attachment: Emergency
Instructions (2)
6. Memo for the Record from John M. Maury,
Subject: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts
on the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko Case w/att
Nosenko's Request for Political Asylum
Secrecy Agreements and Financial Arrangements
Between the CIA and Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko
Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckinridge,
Subject: Office of Security Reports on PARAGON,
NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX I and II and MOCKINGBIRD
Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckinridge,
Subject:
Attachments:
DATE
1 Jul 64
5 Aug 69
4 Feb 64
21 Apr 69
31 Dec 74
13 Jan 75
Nosenko
1. Memo for IG from C. W. Kane, Subject: Yurily
Ivanovich Nosenko;
9 Jan 75
5
1A. Memo for USIB Members from M. Carter, 12 Feb 64, 12 Feb 64
Subject: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko
Questions and Answers Concerning the Treatment of Soviet
Defector Nosenko
5
Memo for the IG, Subject: The Nosenko Case
Attachment:
1. Summary of 1967 Document Which Outlines the
Nosenko Case
67

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_133.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO
IDENTIFICATION:
1
BACKGROUND
APPROVAL
:
"
NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet
KGB officer who defected in 1964 and
was subsequently involuntarily con-
fined in the U.S. by the Agency for
a period of approximately three years.
NOSENKO first contacted Agency per-
sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962
and subsequently defected in January
1964. NOSENKO was brought to the H.S.
and after a period of relative freedom.
he was involuntarily confined in
April 1964. From April 1964- to
August 1965, he was confined at an
Agency controlled site in Clinton,
Maryland. From August 1965 to
'
October 1967, NOSENKO was confined
at Camp Peary, Virginia. In October
1967, he was returned to the Washington
area, given increasing amounts of
freedom until he was given total free-
dom in April 1969. NOSENKO became 3
U.S. citizen in April 1974. NOSENKO
was employed by the Agency as a
consultant in March 1969 and continues
under contract to date. His present
salary is $23,500 per year.
(1) The legal basis to confine NOSENKO.
against his will was discussed by
Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with
the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April
1964 (Tab 1). On 3 April 1964, the
Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence
Houston, advised the Director of Security
by memorandum that such confinement was
proper (Tab 2).
(2) There are a series of letters from
the DDCI, DCI and others to various
agencies, including the Department of
Justice and the White House, covering
the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing
awareness of these agencies of the
NOSENKO affair (Tab 3).
(3) The conditions of NOSENKO's confine-
ment were established by the Office of
Security (Tabs 4 & 5).
į

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_134.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
RESULTS
TERMINATION
COMMENTS
.
By memorandum dated 2 October 1968,
the Director of Security forwarded
two reports to the DDCI summarizing
the results of the NOSENKO case to
that date. The reports are voluminous.
One was prepared by the Office of
Security and the other by the FBI.
Both reports conclude that NOSENKO
A draft
was a bona fide defector.
memorandum attached to this file,
dated 21 October 1968 and prepared
by the CI Staff, raises question
regarding NOSENKO's bona fides
and challenges the above two reports.
NOSENKO continues under contract to
the Agency. He is brought to Washington
periodically to consult on matters
germane to his background and experience.
Various reports are available in the
files of the Office of Security which
detail financial aspects of this case.
No final accounting has been made since
the project continues.
(1) While the Office of Security files
do document the rationale for the original
confinement of NOSENKO, they do not
document the rationale for his continued
confinement over so long a period of time.
A memorandum dated 5 August 1969 states
that various congressional staff officers
were briefed on NOSENKO and states that
concern for his safety, as well as con-
cern regarding his bona fides, prompted
the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6)
(2) Office of Security files document
a period in 1969 during which a mail
cover was placed on NOSENKO.
(3) During the above period, NOSENKO
was allowed a pleasure trip to Florida.
During this trip, Agency personnel, with
apparent Headquarters approval, obtained
the services of prostitutes.
apparently occurred on at least two
occasions.
This
2

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_135.jpeg ---
14-00000
FILES
Office of Security files on NOSENKO
are maintained in the following
locations:
OS/SSD (Contact Mr. Charles Phalen)
-
OS/SAC (Contact Mr. Bruce Solic)
-
=
;
:
3

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_137.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
SECRET
EYES CITY
parole can be interpreted to moan parole to a specific
locale which would provide some justification for our
detaining him for questioning. It was then pointed out,
however, that if he said he wished to leave the country
to return to the Soviet Union, technically we would not
be able to detain his further. In this event, we would
bo faced with the need to deport him quickly and quietly
and for this purpose the immigration warrant of arrest
and deportation was probably the best instrument.
5. Hr. Katzenbach asked Mr. Foley to check into
this and Mr. Foley will in turn contact Mr. Houston.
Mr. Houston will in turn discuss the problem with CIA
Office of Security officials to get the background of
their liaison with the INS on these matters,
•
6. Mr. Holms thanked. Mr. Katzenbach for his assistance
and we departed amid some jovial banter with respect to
"The Spy Who Came in From the Cold" about what we expected
to happen to him when he started to climb over that "wall"
in Berlin.
David E. Murphy'
Chief, SR Division
SECRET
173 ONLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_138.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
(D
C/SB
OGC 64-0903
April 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR:
DUM FOR: :
SUBJECT:
Director of Security
Parole Status of Defectors
•
1. On 2 April 1964 we had a discussion with the Department
of Justice on the status of aliens whose inspection by I& NS is deferred
upon arrival at our request and who are then paroled to this Agency.
It was the position of the Department of Justice that we were responsible
for taking any action necessary to carry out the terms of the parole.
2. As you know, a basic parole agreement was executed by the
Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955. After setting up
conditions for authorizing parole in any one case, the agreement states:
"After parole of such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will assume
responsibility for care, supervision and control of a kind and degree it
believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States
during continuance of their parole status." This means that the
responsible Agency officials must take the minimum action necessary
, to protect the internal security needs of the United States. The word
"minimum" is not necessarily a limitation. It merely means that good
judgment must be used as to what kind and degree of action is necessary.
3. The agreement further provides that upon completion of the
parolee's intelligence or operational purposes in the United States or if
internal security reasons so require, the alien will be removed from
this country through arrangements made by the Agency and, in such
case, the Agency will inform the Service in advance of each proposed
departure.
Lawrence
Dittiristin
LAWRENCE R. HOUSTON
General Counsel
cc: DD/P
C/SR
SETTET
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_139.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
*January 1975
1. Information that NOSENKO had defected and was in the United
States in February 1964 was known to appropriate agencies and articles
had appeared in the public media..
2. NOSENKO was in the United States under an I&NS parole as
the responsibility of CIA. The FBI was fully advised of the presence of
NOSENKO in the United States and interviewed NOSENKO on several
occasions in March 1964. The United States Intelligence Board was
also formally advised on 12 February 1964 concerning the defection of
NOSENKO. On 14 February 1964, NOSENKO was interviewed by Soviet
in the presence of 1&NS and State Department officials
officials/and NOSENKO reaffirmed his previous request for asylum in
the United States.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_136.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGRET
EVPLY
2 April 1964.
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT:
Discussion with Deputy Attorney.
General on Nosenko Case
1. Nr Helms, Nr. Houston and Mr. Murphy met with
the Deputy Attorney General and members of his staff to
discuss subject case. Present from Mr. Katzenbach's.
staff were Messrs. Foley, Yeagley and Reis.
2. Mr. Holas explained the Nosenko case briefly
and indicated that shortly we would be faced with what
we at least considered to be two problems on which we
would like the advice of the Department of Justice.
First, wo would secon feel compelled to begin hostile
interrogation of Nosenko in order to arrive at the truth
with respect to his mission for the KGB and wo wondered
what the legal position would be in circumstances in
which we detained Nosenko against his will for this pur-
poso. Second, we would have to be ready after determin-
ing that we could obtain no additional information from
Nosenko to deport him. We had thought of taking him to
Germany and transferring him to Soviet custody in Borlin
where this has been done a number of times in the past.
3. There was some discussion of whether deportation
to another country might be a consideration. Nr. Helms
explained we would probably face publicity problems in
deporting to a third country of the kind we would en-
counter if he were free in the U. S. Nr. Helms noted
there were many items of information which we and the
FBI realizo are of no significance because of the file
holdings we have but which an unscrupulous newspaper man
could use to create mischief. This aspect was then dropped
and it was the consensus that Serlin was probably the best
place.
4. The question of the basis for detention was again
raised and related by Mr. Foloy to the conditions under
which Nosenko is in this country. He is here as an "ox-
clusion and parole case" which means he has not been
admitted and has been paroled to the Agency which is
responsible for him while ho is in this country. This
SECRET
ETES ONLY
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_14.jpeg ---
4-00000
!
:
SEGUET
C/SB
OGC 64-0903
3 April 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Security
SUBJECT:
Parole Status of Defectors
1. On 2 April 1964 we had a discussion with the Department
of Justice on the status of aliens whose inspection by I&NS is deferred
upon arrival at our request and who are then paroled to this Agency.
It was the position of the Department of Justice that we were responsible
for taking any action necessary to carry out the terms of the parole.
2. As you know, a basic parole agreement was executed by the
Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955. After setting up
conditions for authorizing parole in any one case, the agreement states:
"After parole of such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will assume
responsibility for care, supervision and control of a kind and degree it
believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States
during continuance of their parole status." This means that the
responsible Agency officials must take the minimum action necessary
to protect the internal security needs of the United States. The word
"minimum" is not necessarily a limitation. It merely means that good
judgment must be used as to what kind and degree of action is necessary.
3. The agreement further provides that upon completion of the
parolee's intelligence or operational purposes in the United States or if
internal security reasons so require, the alien will be removed from
this country through arrangements made by the Agency and, in such
case, the Agency will inform the Service in advance of each proposed
departure.
Lawrence How
LAWRENCE R. HOUSTON
General Counsel
Cc: DD/P
C/SR
SPOTET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_142.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
There are enclosed Forms I-125 and background data,
in duplicate, concerning the subject.
Enclosures.
.
ORIGINATOR:
Sincerely,
Richard Helms
Director
/s/ H. J. Osborn
Howard J. Osborn
Director of Security
8 October 1969
Date
Distribution: Orig.
->>
-
Andressee
Signor's copy
DEC.
1-32
63 Div.
CI Staff
· DDP
-
030
CS Files
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_140.jpeg ---
14-00000
I SCUNTY LEVIS-JOM
:
1
SACHET
Department of Justice.
Washington 20530
Cctober 20, 1963
..
Mr. Richard Helms
Director
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C. 20505
Dear Mr. Helms:
Re: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko
(ER 69-5003/1)
6
Reference is made to your letter dated October 9, 1969,
concerning the above case, in which you urge the concurrence
of the Attorney General in your proposal to have the above-
named alien admitted for permanent residence in the United
States in accordance with the provisions of Section 7 of the
Cantral Intelligence Act of 1949, as amended.
The Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization has
informed me that on the basis of the records of his Service
and the information furnished by you, and in the absence of
any other evidence adverse to the alien, he concurs in your
proposal that the alien be permitted to enter the United
States for permanent residence under the authority of the
foregoing statute.
-
Upon the basis of all the evidence received for consid-
eration and your statement of recommendation and approval
which carries with it your determination that the entry of the
individual concerned is in the interest of national security
and in the furtherance of the national intelligence mission,
I concur in your recommendation that the admission for perma-
nent residence of the subject alien be authorized under the
provisions of Section 7 of the Central Intelligence Agency
Act of 1949, as amended.
SECRET
Respectfully,
For the Attorney General
d. Walter progley.
Assistant Attorney General
ing and
fation
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_143.jpeg ---
14-00000
Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO (Aka: Yuri NOSSENKO)
30 October 1927
Male
Soviet
Nicolayev, Ukraine, USSR
Brown Blue/Gray 5ft. 11 inches
Divorced
Caucasian

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_141.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
SECRET
9 OCT 197
ER 69-500311
Mr. Raymond F. Farrell
Commissioner of Immigration
and Naturalization
Department of Justice
Washington, D. C
Dear Mr. Farrell:
SUBJECT: Yurly Ivanovich NOSENKO
Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 7 of
the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, as amended,
I approve and recommend for your approval the entrance
of subject into the United States for permanent residence
since his entry is in the interest of the national security
and essential to the furtherance of the national Intelligence
mission. In accordance with previous correspondence in
Section 7 cases, it is understood that you will present this
matter to the Attorney General for his approval.
Since bis defection in February 1964, the subject has
provided valuable information to this Agency and he will
continue to be of value in the future.
Subject has been investigated abroad and here over a
period of five years and has submitted to a technical inter-
rogation. The question of bona fides is a continuing one and
should any information be developed definitely disproving his
bona fides, it shall be made available to your Service and the
Attorney General.
i
SECRET
1371
Jackie TH 1429313)
£289,718:38 11
fa

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_144.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!
SECRET
RIOGRAPHIC DATA
SUBJECT)
AXAs
DPOB
MARITAL STATUS:
CHILDRENT
EDUCATION):
Yuriy Ivanovich KOSZNZO
Tari MOSSENKO
35 October 1927, Nicolayev, Ukraine, UZSK
1946 – Married and divorced Flavia
MOSINEO (New: SMSHOY).
1916 – Married Augustins K. KOJENZO-
(A001 TZLIGIN), 1949 • 3eparated and
1951 – divorcad..
23 June 1953 - Married Ludmila Tallaccina
TOSENKO (Tea) KOZHETNIKOYA), January
‹ 1964 – se7azzled and 1769 – Üvorced,
-
-
Daughters - Oxana NOSENED, born 11 August
1954, Moscow; Tamara XOEZMKO, bem
13 July 1958, Moscow. (Both Living in USZR)
1942-1943 - Attended various USSR Naval
Schools.
1948-1952 – Attended Iactitats of Interna-
tional Relations, Moscow.
EMPLOYMENT!
March 1951-March 1933 – Bovist Naval RO
(Naval Intelligence)..
March 1933–Februzzy 1954 – Cifeer in KOB.
(The Committed for State 3ecurity).
XOD..
MILITARTI.
NATIONALITY)
PRESENT AND PAST
POLITICAL AFFIL-
LATIONS:
Lieutenant in CISR Navy while in school and
during B service.
Soviet
1943-1754 - Member Romesizol, U32R
1756
-
Candidata Commuut Party
1957-1966 - Member Communist Pez:7, USGR
SECRET
23

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_147.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOP SECRET
EYES ONLY
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
11 February 1354
Mr. McGeorge Bundy
Yuri Ivanovich NOSENIO
1. This monorandum refers to the State Department
release of 10 February on subject case and provides addi-
tional background as well as information on his current ·
status..
2.
As a IGB staff officer, NOSENIO is regularly:
assigned to the Counterintelligence Directorate of the
XGB in Moscow but was included in the Soviet dolegation.
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover arrange-
ment which permitted him to carry out intelligence and
security functions in Geneva on behalf of the KGB...
3. HOSENIO also attended various sessions of the
Disarmament Conference hold in Genova in 1962. During :
the course of these sessions NOSENKO sought contact with
officials of the U. S. Government, informed these officials
that he was affiliated with the Sovist State Security ap-
paratus and volunteered to aid the U. S. Government in .
detecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the
U. S. Government. During the course of his contact with
U. S. authorities NOSENKO stated that his cooperation with
the U. S. Government originated with his distaste and hatred
for the Soviet regime in general, with his desirs to obtain
revenge for the unjust death of his father, a senior official
in the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general
admiration of the Americans with whom he had come in con-
tact within the Soviet Union.
4.
.
In late January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Conava,
again masquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference. Subject secretly notified
his CIA contacts in the United States concerning his pres-
once in Geneva and arranged to meet with those contacts.
During a series of meetings NOSENXO provided information
including decuments concerning Soviet State Security acti-
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detailed account
of the XG3 operation against U. S. Professor Barghoora
which NOSEMKO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEHICHHASTNIY, the Chairman of the Counittee
for State Security (KG3).
EYES ONLY.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_148.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
:
TUP SECRET
:
5. During these most recent meetings NOSENKO announced
his desire to leave the USSR paraanently and sack his futura
in the xost. He claimed his now work in the XG3 (First
Deputy Chief of that department charged with the surveillance
and recruitment of American visitors to the USSR) was ox-
panding and that he would not be able to visit the West
with any frequency.. Accordingly, he prepared a request for
political asylum in the United States.
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing interro-
lo was taken to
gation. Plans are now being made to remove him to the U. S.
6. It should be noted that CIA contact with Subject.
has not been extensive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides.
It should also be noted that NOSENXO's duties were not con-
corned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conferonca,
and he therefore is not expected to be able to shod much
any, light on that area of our interest.
if
"
7. The possibility that NOSENKO's defection was do-
signed to wreck the conference was most carefully considered.
The decision to accept him was taken on the conviction that
the Soviets would not have chosen such a vulnerablo agent
(staff officer of the XC3) for this kind of moyo.
CSR/DEM/jif 0 11 Feb 64.
Distribution:
Orig
-
- Adse
2 cc - SR/CI/X-Downey
1 cc - C/CI
1 CC
->
CSR
C - DD/OS
Thomas H. Karanessines
· Acting Deputy Director
for Plans.
TOP SECRET
EVES ONLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_145.jpeg ---
14-00000
TREND
SECRET
SP-1687
18 JUL 1969
Mr. Raymond F. Farrell
Commissioner of Immigration
and Naturalization
Department of Justice"
Washington, D. C..
Attention: Mr. Frank E. Bartos
Dear Sir:
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO
Reference is made to previous correspondence
in this caso…..
>
Subject continues to be of operational interest
to this Agency. Therefore, it is requested subject's
parole to this Agency be extended for an additional
period of six (6) months beyond the expiration date of
his stay of 16 August 1969.
Your cooperation in this matter is very much ap-
preciated.
Sincerely,
SIGNED
Victor R. White
Deputy Director of Security
(Investigations and Operational Support)
OS/AAS/LW:es 16 July 1969
NOT TO BE DISSEMINATED FURTHER OR SYSTAITED
TO ANYONE HITMONT PRIOR PERMISSICH OF THE
CENTRAL INTELLIENCE AGENCY.
SECRET
33121
vi

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_146.jpeg ---
14-00000
W.
!
SECRET
NITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUST
IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20536
July 24, 1969
Deputy Director of Security
(Investigations and Operational Support)
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C.
Attention: Mr. Louis Wienckowski
Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nossenko,
Your SP-1687.
A13 724 817
N
!
}
:
i
:
Dear Sir:
As you requested in your letter dated July 18, 1969, the
subject-bas-been-given-a-further-period of stay to expire on
February 16, 1970.
Sincerely,
Frank buits
Frank E. Bartos
Chief Intelligence Officer
Field Inspection and Security Division
21.168
c.n. 16 Jan. 1970
(c)
SECRET
:
i
· 1
a from entomatic
-
and

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_149.jpeg ---
14-00000
CE
ASENICH
CONTRA
TOP SET
EYES ONLY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 23.
iac
OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CONTRAL INTELUCENCE
12 February 1964
NEMORANDUM FOR:
United States Intelligence Board Members
:
SUBJECT:
Yuri Ivanovich NOSENKO
1. This memorandum refers to the State Department
release of 10 February on subject case and provides addi-
tional background as well as information on his current
status.
2. As a XGB staff officer, NOSENZO is regularly.
assigned to the Counterintelligence Directorate of the
XG3 ia Noscow but was included in the Sovist delegation
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover arrange-
sent which permitted his to carry out intelligence and.
security functions in Gonova on behalf of the XG3.
3. 'NOSENKO also attended various sessions of the
Disarmament Conforanco hold in Ganava in 1962. During the
course of these sessions, NOSENKO sought contact with
officials of the U. S. Government, informed those officials
that he was affiliated with the Soviet State Security ap-
paratus and volunteered to aid the U. 3. Government in
detecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the
U. S. Government. During the course of his contact with
U. S. authorities, NOSENKO stated that his cooperation with
the U. S. Government originated with his distaste and hatred
for the Sovist regine in general, with his desire to obtain
revenge for the unjust death of his father, 2 senior official
in the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general
admiration of the Americans with whom he had come in con-
tact within the Soviet Union.
4. In late January 1964, NOSENO arrived in Geneva,
again masquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference.
his CIA contacts in the United States concerning his pres-
Subject secretly notified
ence in Geneva and arranged to meet with these contacts.
During a series of meetings NOSEN provided information
including decuments concerning Soviet State Security acti
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detailed account .
TUP SUBRET
EYES ONLY
!

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
ņ
:
January 1975
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
1. Information that NOSENKO had defected and was in the United
States in February 1964 was known to appropriate agencies and articles
had appeared in the public media..
:
2. NOSENKO was in the United States under an I&NS parole as
the responsibility of CIA. The FBI was fully advised of the presence of
NOSENKO in the United States and interviewed NOSENKO on several
occasions in March 1964. The United States Intelligence Board was
also formally advised on 12 February 1964 concerning the defection of
NOSENKO. On 14 February 1964, NOSENKO was interviewed by Soviet
in the presence of NS and State Department officials
officials/and NOSENKO reaffirmed his previous request for asylum in
the United States.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_151.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
Nosenko's Account Disputes Charge by Soviet
By TAD SZULC
ELLE
Defection Preceded Report Service. Officials of the State
to Swis Police, Apparently
Raling Out Negligence
| Department, the Central In-
.
tolligence Agency and the
Immigration and Naturalization
Service were also present.
Mr. Naraka was described as
to The New York TEAM
WASHINGTON, Feb. 17
Turt 1: Nosenko told a Soviet
Embassy official at there can-
frontation here-last Friday that
Ne left Switzerland on the way
the Unitat States 28 hours.
ere his defection was re- Swiss diplomat had been per-
posted by the Russians to the nitted to talic separately with the Soviet diplomat during their
(Mr. Nosenko…..
Swiss authorities. :
..
.
having been completely relaxed
(during the interview.
He is understood to have told)
businessike conference that hu.
This statement by the former: Information made available defected of his own volition.
sta officer of the Soviet Com-today has thrown new light without any outside pressure
tes of State Security, the on the defection
'secret police, appeared to amount The Soviet delegation ined, did not ally Sovet resent-
His statements it was report-
ta a denial of the Soviet charge, Geneva, It was reported?, toldiment against Swiss authorities.
that the Swiss authorities had the Swiss police at 5 POL Feo. Matomatic report reaching the
been negligent in preventing his 5 that Mr. Nosenko was miss- State Department said that So-
defection..
Ing. But fr.: Nosenko's state viet diplomats in foreign capt-
Mr. Nosenko, who quit as a ments. In the presence of the tals continued to register com.
member of the Soviet delegation Soviet Embassy official are said plaints about alleged negligence
to the Geneva disarmament con- to have shown that his actuallaiter Mr. Nasenso's conference
ference Feb 4, was allowed to defection, took place at 1 P.M. with the Soviet diploma'.
meet with gaySoviet diplomat the preceding day..
-
here in the presence of United The Soviet delegation, an
States officials, ásį 200
☐ nounced Mr. Nosenko's disap-l
. The State Department an-pearance Feb:
nounced at the time that the The meeting between Mr.
confrontation was taking place Nosenko and the Soviet Em-
in Washington at the request of bassy official took place in the
the Soviet. Embassy, but no headquarters of the Washing-
other details.were made public. ton field_office of the [m
The department, said that almigration and. Naturalization
190.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_150.jpeg ---
14-00000
of the KG3 operation against U. S. Professor Barzhoora
which NOSENKO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEXICHASTRY, the Chairman of the Committes
for State Security (KGB).
5. During these most recent meetings NOSENXO announced
his desire to leave the USS2 permanently and seek his futuro
in the Nest. He claimed his now work in the XCB (First
Deputy Chief of that department charged with the surveillance
and recruitment of American visitors to the USSR) was ax-
panding and that he would not be able to visit the Most
with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a request for
political asylum in the United States. Ho was taken to
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing interro-
gation. Plans are now being made to remove his to the U. S.
6. It should be noted that CIA contact with Subject
has not been extensive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides.
It should also be noted that NOSENKO's juties were not con-
'corned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conforance,
and he therefore is not expected to be able to shed auch, if
any, light on that area of our interest.
7.
The possibility that NOSENXO's defection was do-
signed to wrock the conference was most carefully considered.
The decision to accept him was taken on the conviction that.
the Soviets would not have chosen such a vulnerable agent
(staff officer of the KGB) for this kind of move.
:
Marshall S. Carter
Lieutenant General, USA
Deputy Director
1
;

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_152.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
U.S. Lets Swiss
And Red Envoys
Talk to Defector
Nosenko Again
"Voices Desire."
For Asyluni
-By Chalmers M.. Roberts
Staff Aspertar
Soviet secret police des
fector Yuri I. Nosenko is
1.
in the United States where
he was interviewed yester:
day by officials of both the
Russian and Swiss Em-
bassies..
The State Department said
each Interview lasted less than
an bour and that a Department
official was present each times
Nosenko reaffirmed his earlier
request for alyum in, th
United States and it will te
granted..
State Department spokesman-
Richard. I. Phillips in giving?
lout this information, declined"
to say where the interviews¨
took place or to give any ded
tails. Earlier he had said it
was, possible that. newsmen
here will be allowed to talk
1 with Nosenka
Soviet Kicks up Fuss
| These developments came
as the Soviet Union kicked up
a diplomatic fuss over the dis-
appearance of Nosenko
Feb. 4, from Geneva, where
on
he had been assigned as an
"expert" in the Soviet delega
tion at the 17-nation disarma-
conference. Philipps
¡meat
said he was "on temporary
duty from KG3 (secret po-
lice) headquarters in Mos
!COW."
• Up to yesterday Moscow
had been directing its pubite
diplomatic wrath at the
with
Swiss, charging them
loose security. The provision
for a Swiss diplomat to inter-
view Nosenko was to assure.
the Swiss that the United
States had taken part in co
illegal act on their soil
The Swiss already had
strongly rejected the Soviet
charges.
On Wednesday, Phillips re-
See DEFECTOR, A5, Col. 1
dai
Cible
Asad fisting
2/15/64

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_155.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
(4) Subject is to receive a haircut, the shorter the better.
(5) Subject is to receive one cigarette on 12 May 1964.
(NOTE--These changes with regard to the bath, haircut,
cigarette are not to be considered as something to be
done on a regular schedule.' We will await specific
instructions from SR Division as to when these items
are to be accomplished in the future.)
(6) Effective immediately, Dr. Bohrer will visit the
Subject only on Tuesday each week.
'
(7) In addition to the above, it must be emphasized that
our attitude toward the Subject will remain precisely
the same, and our security procedures, including
searches, will continue to be at maximum control.”
....
3. It was further ascertained that we will have custody of
.the Subject until at least July. It was suggested that perhaps we may
wish to explore some modifications in the assignment of
personnel
or schedule of assignments. In addition, the Acting Chief, Support
Branch has suggested that immediate consideration be given to
devising necessary procedures to be followed in the event of an
emergency involving loss of control of the Subject. This should
be discussed immediately with the responsible DFO supervisors
and specific procedures devised, and all guards properly informed
as to their responsibilities in this matter.
Kin
Jack M. Bauman
Bauman/ewd(5-12-64)
SEGRET
2

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_156.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE
Headquarters
10 JUL 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR
: Special Agent in Cherge
District Field Office
SUBJECT
: LESHIK, George M.
(Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody ot).
#262 622 C - SD/1
1. Reference is sede to the outline of emergency instructions
submitted by you on 1 July 1964 for Headquarters approval.
2. The plan as outlined is approved and should be implemented
immediately..
HOBIASSEN: dr
DDS/10SC JULY 1964
ADDS/ICS PPLEMENTAL
ASST/IOS
C/ID
C/CSD.
DC/OSD
C/SED
C/8:3
C/S3 ✓
C/ID/
it
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_154.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
12 May 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: Acting Chief, Support Branch
FROM
SUBJECT
nat
: Chief, Operational Support Division
AEFOXTROT
#262 622
ADDR/ICS
ACST/IOS
C/DO
C/D
CAS D
C; .3
C
C
2 ye
ALTS
18:175
1. This memorandum is primarily for the record and will
record the essence of a meeting held on the morning of 12 May.
1964, at which the following were present: Messrs. Charles Kane,
Jack Bauman, OS; Dr. Charles Bohrer, Medical Staff; Messrs.
Bagley, Karpovich (pro), McMahon and David Murphy, SR Division.
2. The essence of this meeting was furnished to the Acting
Chief, Support Branch on 12 May 1964, as follows:
Effective immediately or as soon as practicable, the following
procedures will apply with regard to the handling of the
Subject:
(1) Subject will receive a regular diet with modest regulated
portions. He is to have no dessert or "trimmings, "
but may have the necessary silverware with which to
eat properly. (CAUTION--Extreme care should be
exercised with regard to controlling the silverware,
and it was suggested that at least two of the guards
be required to count the silverware in and out; that
the silverware be placed on the tray in a manner
where it could be observed before the guards enter
the room, etc.)
(2) Arrangements are to be made for the installation of
adequate air-conditioning equipment to insure that a
comfortable temperature is maintained. (It is under-
stood that there is quite a bit of equipment available
through Logistics channels.)
(3) Subject is to receive a bath; change of underwear;
change of uniform; and a change of linen for his bed.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_153.jpeg ---
14-00000
Swiss, Soviets
See Defector
ported yesterday, a Sovieticalled in
Soviet called in Amer
•
Ambia-
Arca
Embassy messenger brought a dor For Kooler and charged
message, to the State Depart the United States with Im
ment asking for information permissable acts in the case.
"as `to`the imanner in which He stopped short of a kidnap
Mr. Nosenko presented himing charge, however, Kohler
self, to the US authorities replied that on behalf of the
and requested an opportunity United States he rejected anx
to-ªInterview” him." The De-implication of American wrong
'partment agreed to the inter doing.
eview with American-officials
✓ present and said Nosenko
Serious Effects Hiated:
also was agreeable.": A reply In Geneva Soviet officials,
about the defection also was including Tsarapkin himself:
given to the Soviet Embassy privately spread to the press
Also on Wednesday, in Gen-
eva, Soviet disarmament dele-hints of serious consequences.
gate Semyon K. Tsarapkin Soun; there were rumors that
gave newsmen an angry states Moscow would pull out its dele
ment aimed at the Swiss and gation, but up to last night not
charging":"provocative activi
such threat; had actually been
ty by unspecified Western
agents. Up to then Tsarapkin made, according to word reach
had been saying both private in Washington
ly and publicly, that the No
In public Tsarapkin said only
senko defection would not af "I have nothing to say. I am
4. fect the disarmament: talks.
SeYesterday the Soviets stoppedį
not in the position to tell you
up their protest in two places, anything
Moscow and Geneva.
At:some so far unspecified
InMoscow. Soviet Foreign date: Notenko, who had ap
Minister Andrei Gromykoparently crossed from Switzer-
land-to: France was down to
the United States. Its ar
sumed hells in the hands of
the Central Intelligence Agen
cythe normal course for de-
fectors
O
Otcelals here yesterday
were knocking down the ideal
that he was a particularly big
fish that he knew any; atomic
secrets: that he knew any:
thing about Soviet disarma-
ment strategy: Rather, they there had been no word up toj
said, he was a KGB stiff offl
icer, a security man operating last night of the defection on
'as is the Soviet practice, in the Soviet radio or in the
a tight compartment. That press though word of mouth.
would mean he would have reports had. spread through
useful and perhaps important the capital
·
knowledge of part of the KGB; It was felt here that Moscow
but probably not much more might have stepped up its
Believed Genuine.
protest after Tsarapkin had
ipublicly downgraded the case
It is assumed here that the in Goneva. At any rate U.S.
36-year-old Nosenko is a gendisarmament negotiator With
uine defector though the positiam C. Foster and Tearapkinj
sibility of his being a double held another business session
agent has not been overlook in Geneva yesterday at which!
ed. It also is felt here that they said the case was not dis-
the Soviet protest" was O cussed
stronger than, could be ex- It also was noted here that
pected. The request for an the Soviet Communist Party
interview rare but not un-Central Committee has been
precedented, was granted. in meeting in Moscow all this
hopes of reciprocal treatment; week. But whether the No
should the occasion arise. Nisenko čase was, discussed wi
Moscow dispatches said; not known.
fised fisting
2/15/64
Folic

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_157.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
!
=
TO SE CPENED BY ADDRECCEE CHE.
1 July 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: Headquarters
SUBJECT
LESNIK, George M.
(Exergency Instructions Regarding Custody or)
#262 622 C SD/1
1. Attached are instructions and procedures to be followed in
the event of emergency situations affecting the SUBJECT'z health,
safety and custody, as well as the security of the safehouse where
SUBJECT is currently being held.
2. This is to formalize instructions which, for the most part,
are already in effect and have been briefed to the personnel of the
District Field Office or are concerned with this case.
3. Dissemination of copies of these instructions to members of
the Special Security Letail will be made upon notification of Headquarters
approval.
Attachment:
Emergency Instructions (2)
0123-
for Special
JOHN D. NOBLE OF
Special Agent in Charge
2 July 64
823627
TO BE CREATED BY ADURESDEE ONLY
DY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_158.jpeg ---
14-00000
EVERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
Instructions and procedures are set forth below for the handling
of emergency situations such as fire, the escape or attempted escape
of SUBJECT, and the sudden illness or serious injury to the SUBJECT.
Should such situations arise, it might be necessary to call on the
Police, the Fire Department, or outside medical facilities for assistance.
It is possible that in such an event representatives of the press or
curiosity-seekers in the local community might be attracted to the site,
thereby creating security problems with respect to the custody and
protection of the SUBJECT from a publicity standpoint.
In view of the above, it is therefore imperative that these in-
structions be thoroughly understood and memorized by all personnel
assigned to the Special Security Detail on this case.
FIRE
(Main House)
1.
In case of fire in the Main House, the person discovering the
fire should apply the nearest fire extinguisher, unless, in his judgment,
the fire has reached such proportions where available equipment would be
useless. Simultaneously, he should dispatch another member of the Security
Detail to alert the Senior Security Agent (SSA) and the other occupants
of the house. If no one is available in the immediate vicinity, the
person discovering the fire should alert others in the house by shouting
'FIRE".
2. Upon being notified of a fire, the SSA shall be responsible for
directing the fighting of the fire, protecting classified and sensitive
documents and equipment on the premises, calling the local Nre Department
if circumstances warrant, and evacuating personnel. Also, at the first
available opportunity, the SSA should call the SAC or ASAC, or if they
cannot be reached, a senior DFO Agent, and furnish him with Nill particulars
concerning the situation and the action.being taken.
3. In utilizing members of the Security Detail in fighting a fire,
it should be borne in mind that two guards must be maintained ca the
third floor at all times. so long as the SUBJECT remains confined to
his quarters. If it should become necessary to remove the SUBJECT from
his quarters during an emergency, a minimum of four guards should be
present unless circunstances are such as to take this infeasible.
In

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_159.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
any event, every possible security precaution should be taken during
the movement of EJEJECT, including the use of handcuffs or any other
restraining devices deemed necessary in order to maintain proper custody
and control over the EUBJECT and prevent his escape.
4. If, in the judgment of the SSA, a fire has reached, or is likely
to reach, proportions that it could not be controlled by firefighting
equipment on the premises, it shall be his responsibility to notify the
Clinton Fire Department. In this event, the Security Detail should
move with dispatch to remove the SUBJECT from the premises prior to
arrival of the Pire Department. The SUBJECT should be placed in an
automobile, accompanied by four members of the Security Detail, and
driven away from the premises. At appropriate intervals, telephone
calls should be made to the safehouse. If no answer is received, the
cognizant DEO cfi-ial should be contacted for instructions as to whether
to return to the safehouse or proceed to an alternate site.
:
FIRE
(Tenant House)
1. In case of fire in the Tenant House, the occupants thereof
should be instructed to immediately notify the Main House and to use
any available means to combat the fire until assistance arrives, unless
the fire is out of control, in which case all efforts should be directed
It should be
towards the evacuation of the occupants of the premises.
clearly understood that in no case should any of the occupents of the
Tenant House call the Fire Department. This decision is the sole respon-
sibility of the SSA.
2. Upon notification of a fire in the Tenant House, the person
notified should immediately inform the SSA and assist in the dispatching
of available personnel and fire extinguishers to combat the fire. If,
in the judgment of the SSA, the fire has reached, or is likely to reach,
proportions that it could not be controlled by the avaliable pirefighting
equipment, it shall be his responsibility to notify the Clinton Fire
Department and to take necessary precautionary measures to prevent the
observation of the SUBJECT by firemen or other unauthorized persons who
might be attracted to the scene.
-2-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
INTERNAL 5ecut
:
SECHET
Department of Justice.
Washington 20530
October 20, 1963
Mr. Richard Helms
Director
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C. 20505
R
Dear Mr. Helms:
Re:
Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko
(ER 69-5003/1)
Reference is made to your letter dated October 9. 1969,
concerning the above case, in which you urge the concurrence
of the Attorney General in your proposal to have the above-
named alien admitted for permanent residence in the United
States in accordance with the provisions of Section 7 of the
Central Intelligence Act of 1949, as amended.
The Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization has
informed me that on the basis of the records of his Service
and the information furnished by you, and in the absence of
any other evidence adverse to the alien, he concurs in your
proposal that the alien be permitted to enter the United
States for permanent residence under the authority of the
foregoing statute.
Upon the basis of all the evidence received for consid-
eration and your statement of recommendation and approval
which carries with it your determination that the entry of the
individual concerned is in the interest of national security
and in the furtherance of the national intelligence mission,
I concur in your recommendation that the admission for perma-
nent residence of the subject alien be authorized under the
provisions of Section 7 of the Central Intelligence Agency
Act of 1949, as amended.
SEBRET
Respectfully,
For the Attorney General
J. Walter googley
Assistant Attorney General
•
autemati:
rem
aling and
fitation
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_161.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
EVERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
of his absence, should be imediately notified and advice obtained as
to any emergency action which should be taken pending his arrival.
Likewise, the CAC or ASAC/PC should be notified immediately after
talking to the doctor in order that he might be apprised of the situation
and any instructions or treatment prescribed by the doctor. Regardless
of any instructions given by the doctor, no action chall be taken to
remove the SUBJECT from the premises or to communicate with any hospital
or ambulance service without the prior authorization of the SAC or ABAC.
2. Should it become necessary to remove the SUBJECT to a hospital
or other location away from the premises, every possible precaution
should be taken to maintain close custody and control over him, and to
prevent disclosure of his true identity and status to unauthorized
persons.
1.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS AND INFORMATION
Two men on duty on third floor who will keep SUBJECT under
constant observation twenty-four hours a day.
2. Four men in attendance whenever SUBJECT leaves cell while
confined to third floor.
3. Six men in attendance benever SUBJECT is taken to interrogation
room on second floor, all to remain available in adjoining room for
removal signal from visitors.
4. Coveralls taken from SUBJECT at 2200 hours and returned the
following morning at 0700 hours daily, leaving SUBJECT in shorts and
undershirt overnight.
5. Military appearance and prompt shift schedules maintained at
all times when in presence of STEJECT.
6. Careful room search, including clothes and bunk, to be conducted
every time SUBJECT leaves cell.
7. SUBJECT must stand in West corner of cell facing well whenever
anyone but Dr. BOHRER enters cell.
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_160.jpeg ---
14-00000
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
3. At the first available opportunity, the CSA should call the
SAC or ASAC, or if they carnet de reached, a senior DFO Agent, and
furnish him with full particulars cerning the situation and the
action being taken.
ESCAPE OR ATTENTE ESCAPE
1. Strict vigilance and security should be maintained on a
24 hour basis in accordance with established procedures in order to
discourage and prevent the SUBVEN's escape. If SUBJECT should make
an attempt to escape, sufficient force should be used as is necessary
under the circumstances in order to subdue the BUBJECT and maintain
custody and control over him. Soverer, unnecessary brutality and the
indiscriminate use of force will not be condoned.
2. All personnel assigned to the Special Security Detail on duty
at the site shall be alerted by means of the emergency alarm and/or
other appropriate means, and brought into play on any escape attempt.
Should the SUBJECT succeed in escaping from the house proper, the SSA
shall be responsible for coordinating and directing a hot pursuit of
the SUBJECT by all means available.
3. The use of firearms should be scrupulously avoided except in
extreme circumstances of self-defense. However, the SCA under circun-
stances that indicate there are no other means of preventing SUBJECT's
total escape, may direct a qualiNei Nrearms-trained agent to fire
shots over SUBJECT's head followed by verbal warming to halt.
event, except in self-defense as stated above, will an agent shoot
directly at the SUBJECT.
I no
4. At the first available opportunity, the SAC/DFO, or in his
absence, one of the ASAC3. should be telephonically advised of all
In no case shall
the circumstances surrounding an escape attempt.
the Police be notified unless authorized by the SAC or ASAC.
-
ILLNESS NXITY
1. In case of sudden illness or serious injury to the SUBVENT,
Dr. Charles BOHRER, or other physician designated by him in the event
2

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_162.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
:
EVERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
2. Windows in cell to remain blacked out and doors to other rooms
on 3rd floor to be closed and locked when SUBJECT leaves cell, in order
to prevent his becoming oriented to surroundings.
9. No unnecessary conversation shall be conducted with JPJECT or
among agents, nor shall any mention of last names be made within SUBJECT's
hearing.
10. SUBJECT is not to have access to newspapers and magazines, nor
permitted to hear radio or television, nor shall there be any discussion
of news events within his hearing. He may be provided selected reading
material upon authorization of Headquarters personnel concerned with the
case.
11.
Recording devices to be promptly activated in order to pick up
any comments by SUBJECT or conversation between him and the doctor or
other operational personnel.
12. Any unusual or significant comments, movements or activities
of EJECT to be promptly brought to the attention of the ESA.
13. Telephone numbers of key Security and Operational personnel,
as well as photographs and physical description of SUBJECT to be maintained
in a secure place for ready reference by the SSA.
1'.51-
14. Should it become necessary to answer questions by the Police
or Pire Department regarding the site, personnel at the site, or with
specific reference to the SUBJECT, such inquiries should be handled
by the SCA with the senior Police or Fire Department official on the
scene. The SSA should converse in private with such official, and
identify himself by utilizing his DODD credential. He should explain
briefly, and only to the extent necessary, that the property is leased
and that it is used occasionally for training purposes.
concerning the SUBJECT should be parried, if possible. However, if
All inquiries
necessary, it may be explained that the SUBJECT has a mental disorder
which cometimes requires special treatment. He should not be identified
under his alias or otherwise. The SSA should tactfully but firmly request
that his cm identity, plus his DOD affiliation, be held in strict confidence,
especially with regard to the press. Inquiries by members of the press
or members of the civilian population should be answered by stating that
the site is rented by a private group who meet periodically for recreation.
-5-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_163.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
☐
SPECIAL CONTACTS
1. George PANEGAULIS, Chief of Police, Prince Georges County.
(Personally known to SNODDY under GOLIATH)
2.
Lieutenant 14001, Commanding Officer, Barracks H, Waldorf,
Maryland, Maryland State Police. (Personally known to PEPPALL
under GOLIATH)
3. Emergency Ambulance
->
Greenbelt Volunteer Fire Department.
(Can be obtained through SNODDY)
Above not to be contacted unless authorized by SAC or ASAC.
!
i
-6-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_164.jpeg ---
14-00000
OLC 60-0673
5 August 196)
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
QUBJECT: Briefing of key Congres Ional Contacts on the
Yuriy Ivanovich Muscako Case
.1. The Director having approved the proposal in my draft memo
of 17.June 1959 (copy attached) regarding the briefing of key congressional
contacts on the history and status of the Yurly Ivanovich Nosekno case, I
have briefed the following staff officers of Agency congressional Subcome
mittees along the lines proposed on the dates indicated:
Frank Slatinshek, Assistant Chief Counsel, House
Armed Services Committee 23 July 1759
--
William Woodruff, Assistant Chief Clerk, Sunate
Appropriations Committe 24 July 1969
Edward Braswell, Chief of Staff, Senate Armed
Services Committee
-->
24 July 1969
Robert Michaels, Staff Assistant, liouse Appropriations
Committee
-->>
27 July 1969
2. I suggested to each that they mention the matter to the respective
chairmen when and if they thought it appropriate. None of the staff officera
registered particular concera or curiosity about the case and I think it
doubtful that all of our chairmen have been informed. Nevertheleзa, I
think we have adequately covered the matter and see no need to pursue it
further at this time.
Mfachstent:
Diatribation:
Original - CLC Subject & mile
1- DOP
1 - Chief, CI Staff
1- Chef, SE Civision
D. Security
:- 800
CGC
1 - CLC Chroso
SECRET
JOHN M. MAURY
SCHN
Legislative Counsel
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_166.jpeg ---
I
14-00000
SECRET BYRS GALV
3. Nosenko had been a KGB officer for approximately ten years
at the time of his defection. Nosenko has provided a large quantity of
counter-intelligence data and a limited amount of positive intelligence.
For example, one of his reports played a part in the negation of a major
hostile penetration in Great Britain. Where appropriate, his information
has been shared with the FBI, other U.S. Government agencies and
foreign Haison services. This has resulted in extensive and continuing
investigative activity. In addition, Nosenko identified many hundreds of
Soviet Intelligence Officers and provided a considerable quantity of useful
information on the organization of the KGB, its operational doctrine and
“its techniques and methods.
4. In debriefing him it became apparent that Nosenko, the privileged
and undisciplined son of a former ranking Minister of the Soviet Government,
was a particularly complex personality, one given to exaggeration of his own
importance. In this regard, certain aspects of his life history, when
weighed against other information already in our possession, raised some
doubts concerning his veracity. To permit extensive and prolonged debriefing,
arrangements were made to accommodate Nosenko under highly secure
conditions. These arrangements were dictated, during the initial phases
at least, by the additional need to provide Nosenko with continuing personal
protection since there was the distinct possibility that, as a KGB ofücer,
2. SECRET EVES ONLY
i
F

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_165.jpeg ---
14-00000
1-9-17-1/2
SECRET
EVES GRLY
· DRAFT:JMM - 19 June 1969
SUBJECT: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts on the Nosenko.Case
The following paragraphs are proposed as guidance for briefing key
:
congressional contacts on the history and status of the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko
case. They are based primarily on material provided by SB Division, and have
been cleared by SB, CI Staff and the Office of Security. It is proposed that
the Chairmen and/or senior staff officers of each of the Agency Subcommittees
be briefed along the lines indicated.
:
1. This case goes back sometime into history and you may recall
having heard of it several years ago. From time to time it has received
press play, both when it first broke in early 1964 and occasionally since.
:
2. Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko, a Staff Officer of the Committee for
State Security (KGB) of the USSR, and son of a former Minister of Ship-
building in the USSR, defected to the Agency in Geneva, Switzerland, on
4 February 1964. He was then brought to the United States where he has
since been in the custody of the Agency undergoing extensive debrieüngs
by officers of the Agency and the FBI.
SECRET EYES CALY
:
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_168.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEB
NOSENKO
Question #1 - Conditions under which Nosenko was held while at.
Clinton? Locked in? Let outside for entertainment?
Prisoner? Treatment?
1
Answer:
During the period of 4 April 1964-13 August 1965, Nosenko
was held in strict confinement under the following conditions:
a.
b.
c.
d.
Confinement in single room except for
periods of interrogation.
Constantly under guard and subject to 24 hour
visual observation with regular room search.
Dress was coveralls and food was of sufficient
quantity but limited in variety.
No unnecessary conversation was permitted, radio
and television were not allowed, newspapers or
any information concerning current events were
forbidden and reading material was extremely
limited.
Question #2 - Conditions at ISOLATION. Same as above.
Answer:
During the period of 13 August 1965 to 25 October 1967,
conditons cited above were basically maintained with the
following additons or changes:
a.
b.
C.
d.
From February 1966 to May 1967, Nosenko was
furnished no reading material.
After May 1967, Nosenko was periodically given
a different volume of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica to read.
From February 1966 to October 1967, Nosenko
was not permitted cigarettes.
Subject was permitted daily exercise in a small
confined area outside the building when weather
permitted.
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_169.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
Question #3 - Did McCone or Raborn have any information on this:
What?
Answer:
Office of Security records contain only limited information
in regard to this question. The SE Division
The SE Division (then SR) was the
responsible office for the confinement of Nosenko until late
October 1967 when total responsibility was transferred to the
Office of Security by the DCI. It is presumed that the DCI was
at least generally aware of the confinement of Nosenko and the
conditions of confinement, but any definite statement must be
based on SE records.
Question #4 - Where is Nosenko working now?
Answer:
Nosenko is currently employed at his personally owned
residence in North Carolina. He is engaged in research and
analytical work based on his previous knowledge of the KGB
and other Soviet matters. He is in the Washington, D. C. area
for several days approximately every six weeks for direct
interviews by the FBI. and Office of Security personnel.
-
Question #5 Is he working for CIA?
Answer:
Nosenko has been employed by the Agency on a full-time
contractual basis since 1 March 1969. The original contract
has been periodically amended to reflect additional remuneration,
primarily to compensate for cost of living increases. In late
1971, Nosenko was compensated by mutual agreement for salary
not received during the 1 April 1964 to 1 March 1969. In addition,
on 12 July 1973 Nosenko signed an acknowledgement and release
of the United States Government and the Central Intelligence
Agency from any claims prior to that date.
Question #6
Answer:
->>
What is his legal status?
Nosenko was naturalized as a United States citizen in
April 1974.
EYES
SCORE
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_167.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
AS PUY
he would be targetted for "executive action" if the Soviets should discover
his whereabouts: With the passage of time, this latter factor is considered
to be sufficiently diminished to justify a phased normalization of Nosenko's
situation--this despite the fact that some points remain unresolved concerning
his bona fides.
5. The Agency, with the assistance of the FBI, is continuing to
look into those questionable aspects of the case, while remaining alert to
the possibility of hostile interest. However, during the full period of his
: stay in the United States Nosenko has cooperated with his interrogators and
•
•
with the other officers responsible for his unfety and welfare, and our
current efforts are being directed toward his gradual adjustment to a normal, .
independent status. As a step in this direction, he is now living in his own
private apartment, subject to some protective surveillance.
6. This action is being taken in full recognition of the normal
problems of readjustment experienced by many defectors as well as the
fact that Nosenko is a potentially greater problem than most. He is an
individual whose actions during resettlement may not always be predictable
or wise from the point of view of his own security. We are hopeful that
Nosenko is sensible enough to realize that undue publicity caused by any rash
action on his part could lead to unpleasant, perhaps even dangerous consequences,
particularly for himself. We therefore believe it appropriate to take this
calculated risk in an attempt to steer him toward a reasonably normal lifa.
i
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_171.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
1 conduct. There were at the time very legitimate reasons to
believe that full and total release of Nosenko would be an
abrogation by the Agency of its legal responsibility. To
gainsay that decision in retrospect is, we believe, an error.
In sum, the act of defection places the defector at the mercy
of the laws of the country to which he defects. It is the
obligation of the accepting country to see to it that the
laws are followed. In the Nosenko case, it seems to us that
the Agency acted in a fully responsible manner to ensure that
its responsibility for the defector was met. While it was.
unfortunate that it took so long to resolve the matter, we
can find no fault with the fact that the Agency met its
responsibility to both the United States and to Nosenko
himself.
i
Attachment: A/S
:
2
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
SECRET
9 CCT 1963
ER 69-5003/1
.1
Mr. Raymond F. Farrell
Commissioner of Immigration
and Naturalization
Department of Justice
Washington, D. C
Dear Mr. Farrall:
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 7 of
the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, as amended,
I approve and recommend for your approval the entrance
of subject into the United States for permanent residenca
since his entry is in the interest of the national security
and unsential to the furtherance of the national Intelligence
mission. In accordance with previous correspondence in
Section 7 cases, it is understood that you will present this
matter to the Attorney General for bis approval.
Since bis defection in February 1964, the subject has
provided valuable information to this Agency and he will
continue to be of value in the future.
Subject has been investigated abroad and here over a
period of five years and has submitted to a technical inter-
rogation. The question of bona fides is a continuing one and
should any information be developed definitely disproving his :
bona fides, it shall be made available to your Service and the
Attorney General.
Now 1
SECRET
Gengan uj
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_170.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Inspector General
SUBJECT
:
The Nosenko Case
Attached please find a summary of a document written in
1967, to the General Counsel outlining the Nosenko case and
explaining to him actions which had been taken with regard to _
Nosenko. As noted in the first paragraph, in October 1967
Nosenko took up residence in the Washington area and was
advised that, should he wish to leave the apartment for any
location whatsoever, he was free to so do. In other words,
from that date, Nosenko was essentially a totally free man.
That he chose not to flee in any way may be indicative of his
attitude toward the manner in which he was handled prior to
October 1967.
While one can criticize the fact that Nosenko was kept
incommunicado for approximately three years, and therefore
presumably denied full civil rights, the attached document
does indicate, we believe, that the Agency was on the horns
of a dilemna in this regard. There were legitimate doubts
about. Nosenko's bona fides and concern that he was a Soviet
plant. There was no country to which he could be deported
save the Soviet Union, and Nosenko himself refused to return
there. Yet, in the United States, save when isolated from
society, he was considered to be a continuing threat to
national security.
-
Recognizing that only legal experts can judge defini-
tively the merits of the case, it seems to the writer that
the Agency had no choice but to hold Nosenko incommunicado.
pending resolution of his bona fides. He was admitted to
the United States under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act, namely as a parolec
to the Agency. As a parolee, Nosenko de facto from the date
of his entry to the United States did not enjoy the full civil
rights of the normal citizen. He was a ward of the Agency, in
a sense, and the Agency was ultimately responsible for his
SECRET
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 018307

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_172.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
:
In early or mid-1967, the Agency General Counsel was
provided a summary of the Nosenko case. The memorandum
sought an advisory opinion from the General Counsel on the
Agency's legal basis for its handling of Nosenko through.
that date and on the legal aspects on the eventual disposi-
tion of Nosenko. Shortly subsequent to this seaorandum to
the General Counsel, Nosenko took up residence in October 1967
in an apartment in the Washington area and was reminded that
should he wish, he could travel freely anywhere at anytime.
He gradually created a new life for himself in the United
States and has indicated on several occasions that he holds
no ill feeling about his handling by the Agency at anytime.
Background
Nosenko voluntarily established contact with CIA repre-
sentatives in Geneva in 1962. He identified himself as a
staff officer of the KGB's internal security directorate and
offered to sell counterintelligence information. This offer
was accepted and he was recruited as an agent in place and
SECRET
;

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_173.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
H
debriefed on counterintelligence matters during five meetings
in Geneva. He then returned to the USSR. He came to Geneva
again in January 1964 as the security officer for the Soviet
disarmament delegation. After a number of meetings with his
CIA handlers he defected on 4 February 1964 and was secretly
taken to Frankfurt, Germany, crossing the Swiss-German border
on the night of 4/5 February with alias U.S. Army identity
documents. In Geneva and again upon arrival in Frankfurt,
Nosenko wrote out an asylum request, requesting political
asylum from the U.S. Government.
Because serious doubts about Nosenko's bona fides had
arisen on the basis of the information he had provided both
in 1962 and in the meetings in Geneva in 1964, it was orig-
inally planned to do a detailed bona fides debriefing and
assessment in Germany before making any decision about moving
Nosenko to the United States. However, unprecedented action
by the Soviet Government in respect to the defection of one
of its citizens forced a change of plans. On 9 February,
unidentified Soviet sources in Geneva leaked the news to the
press that Nosenko, described as an "expert attached to the
Soviet Delegation to the Disarmament Conference" had dis-
appeared, and that it was presumed that he had defected.
2
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_176.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
i
made available to representatives of the FBI for debriefing
on matters affecting their responsibilities. Although allowed
out for evening and week-end excursions, Nosenko was at all
times accompanied by O/S personnel. In addition, he took a
two-week vacation to Hawaii, again accompanied by case offi-
cers and security guards. Evidence continued to mount that
he was a KGB plant, and at the same time it became obvious
that it would be impossible to proceed further to resolve
the many suspicious points and contradictions that had arisen
without changing the conditions in which he was being held.
Nosenko was growing increasingly uncooperative, especially
when sensitive areas were touched upon, and constantly pressed
for the legalization of his status in the U.S. and the issuance
of an alien registration card. At the same time, Nosenko's
heavy drinking and other unruly personal habits were causing
increasing difficulties to the security personnel charged with
keeping him under control and out of trouble at all times in
accordance with Agency local responsibility. It was clear
that it was only a matter of time before he created a public.
scandal. More importantly, he was in a position to communi-
cate with the KGB since physical control could not be absolute.
On 4 April 1964, Nosenko voluntarily underwent a polygraph
examination. The results of this examination indicated deception
3
Į
5
SECRET
:.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_177.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
!
1
on a number of critical points indicating that he was sent
by the KGB to perform one or more missions which also involved
his penetration of the Agency and its operations. It was
decided, therefore, that the physical circumstances of Nosenko's
stay in this country would have to be drastically changed if
the Agency were to carry out its counterintelligence responsi-
bilities and adhere to the terms of the parole agreement.
a result, he was moved to quarters where his movements could
be more easily controlled, and his outing privileges were
suspended pending resolution of bona fides.
:
As
It is worth noting that had we not taken the above action
but accepted Nosenko at face value, it is quite possible that
we would have proceeded with a series of operational actions
en the basis of his information. The results of some of these
actions could have been very embarrassing to the U.S. Government
politically and damaging to U.S. national security. For exam-
ple, his chief operational proposal at the time, and one that
he was most insistent that we should proceed with immediately,
involved the compromise of a very senior Soviet official.
Sona Fides
Beginning in April 1964, hundreds of hours were devoted
to interrogations of Nosenko (in which he willingly cooperated)
and a great deal of time was spent on exhaustive collateral
6
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_174.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
SECRET
;
Because of mounting pressure from the press, which included
much speculation that Nosenko was a high level scientist or
disarmament expert, it was decided that the State Department
would make a brief announcement acknowledging Nosenko's
request for asylum in the U.S. and identifying him as a
member of the KGB. This was done on 10 February. On 11 Feb-
ruary, the Soviet Government delivered a note to the American
Embassy in Moscow asking how Nosenko left Switzerland and
requesting an immediate interview with him and his release.
On 12 February, Soviet Ambassador to the Disarmament Confer-
ence TSARAPKIN held a press conference in Geneva in which he
accused the Swiss Government of failure to cooperate in
locating Nosenko. Although the Swiss categorically rejected
these charges, the American Ambassador to Switzerland recom-
mended that Swiss authorities be allowed to interview Nosenko..
to convince themselves that Nosenko had left Switzerland of
his own free will.
On 12 February 1964, on the instructions of the Director,
Nosenko was brought to the United States. He travelled by
commercial air, again using alias U.S. Army identification,
and was admitted to the country at New York City (in true
name) on parole under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
3
SECRET
14

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_178.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
investigations. We concluded that it had been established
beyond reasonable doubt that Nosenko was a KGB agent who
established contact with CIA, subsequently defected on KGB
instructions, and that he came to the United States on a
deception mission. The implications of this mission had a
grave and direct bearing on U.S. national security. Although
our findings were supported by the results of two polygraph
examinations, the nature of the evidence was inadmissable in
a court of law. In any case, it is clear that Nosenko had
not been in a position to perform any overt act of transgres-
sion of U.S. espionage laws since 4 April 1964 when he was.
placed in a restricted area and deprived of any conceivable
means of communication with the KCB.
Nosenko did not admit that he defected on KGB orders
or that he came to the U.S. on a KGE mission. He has admitted,
however, that he made numerous lies about his personal history
and about the details of his KGB service to U.S. officials,
both before and after arriving in the United States.¨
Coordination with Other U.S. Government Agencies
USIB Members. In accordance with the DDCI's ruling
relating to a defector who has been a member of a hostile
intelligence service, Nosenko's status and handling was dis-
cussed at an executive session of USIB and decided on an
7
SECRET
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_175.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
SEGRET
:
"
At
On 13 February, representatives of the Swiss and Sovict
Embassies in Washington advised the State Department that
they desired interviews with Nosenko. On 14 February, in
Moscow, Soviet Foreign Minister GROMYKO called in Ambassador
KOHLER and protested "impermissable activities" on the part
of the U.S. in Nosenko's case. Soviet press spokesmen took
an even harder line to Western correspondents, and accused
the U.S. of kidnapping Nosenko. On the afternoon of 14 Sep-
tember, at two separate interviews, he spoke first to Swiss
Embassy and then to Soviet Embassy representatives.
these interviews, which were also attended by State Department
and INS officials, Nosenko confirmed that he left Switzerland
of his own free will to seek asylum in the U.S. In addition,
he replied to questions of the Soviet Embassy representative
to the effect that he was renouncing his Soviet citizenship.
On the evening of 14 February, the U.S. State Department made
a brief formal reply to the Soviet protest, then issued a
brief statement to the press noting that the interviews had
been held and that Nosenko had confirmed his desire to remain
in this country.
From the time of his arrival to 4 April 1964, Nosenko
was housed in the Washington area. During this period, reg-
ular systematic debriefing was commenced, and Nosenko was
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_179.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
SECRET
ad hoc basis.
Nosenko defected on 4 February 1964, and the
Secretary of State, the Attorney General, the Special Assis-
tant to the President on National Security Affairs, McGeorge
Bundy, General Carroll, Director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency and the FBI were all notified immediately.
On S Febru-
It was
ary 1904, General Carter reported the defection to an exécutive
session of USIB and followed this up with formal statements to
USIB members on 11 and 19 February 1964, which stated that
Nosenko's bona fides had not yet been established.
agreed that no DS number would be issued to Nosenko, and that
he would be handled on a special basis by this Agency.
fact, normal USIB interest in Nosenko as a defector dropped
off drastically as it became quickly apparent that he had no
positive intelligence interest of value to any part of the
community.
In
The President was informed of the full extent of our
suspicions about Nosenko's bona fides by the then Director,
Mr. Mccone, on 11 February 1964. Nr. Patrick Coyne, Executive
Secretary of the PFIAB, was given a similar briefing by
Mr. Helms on 19 February 1964.
Generals Carroll and Fitch of DIA were also subsequently
informed of the problems about Nosenko's bona fides.
:
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
There are enclosed Forms I-125 and background data,
in duplicate, concerning the subject,
Enclosures.
ORIGINATOR:
Sincerely,
Richard Helms
Director
8 October 1969
Date
/s/ H. J. Oborn
Howard J. Obern
Director of Soenrity
Distribution: Orig. & 1 - Addressee
Signor's copy
DECI.
1-32
SB Div.
1
CI Staff
1
DDP
1
-
QGC
OS Files
SECRET
,

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_180.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
The Secretary of State, Ambassador Thompson, and other
senior officials in the Department of State were informed of
our reservations about Nosenko's bona fides and our fears that
he might be a dispatched KGB agent. In discussions about the
possibility of Nosenko's eventual deportation, the Secretary
of State expressed serious concern about the adverse reaction
that such a move might have on other potential defectors.
The Director of Security, State Department, was informed
of the bona fides problem at an early date. We have worked
closely with this office since then on the problem of eval-
uating the significance of Nosenko's information as it affects
the security interests of the State Department.
Because so much of Nosenko's information affected U.S.
internal security matters for which the FBI bears primary
responsibility, and because the possibility that Nosenko was
a KGB plant had a direct bearing on the validity of certain
FEI operations, the FBI was kept fully informed on our views
about Nosenko's bona fides and our progress in interrogating.
and investigating him from the moment of his defection. The
FBI liaison officer was told of our reservations on Nosenko's
bona fides as early as 5 February 1964. The Director of the
F31 and his deputy for Internal Security, William Sullivan,
were kept completely up to date, and we coordinated all major
}
9
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_183.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
to the effect that Nosenko considers this approach to repre-
sent blatant and cruel manipulation of his family by the KGB
and that he will not lend himself to the scheme by agreeing
to an interview or in any other way.
Nosenko's Status
To recapitulate, Nosenko entered the United States on
12 February 1964 on parole to the Agency under the provisions
of Section 212 (d) (5) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act. Parole responsibility is delegated to the Agency by
the Attorney General under the terms of an agreement executed
by the Attorney General and the ECI on 10 February 1955,
which states:
"After parole of such aliens, the Central Intel-
ligence Agency will assume responsibility for
care, supervison and control of a kind and
degree it believes consistent with the internal.
security needs of the United States during con-
tinuance of their parole status."
In accordance with our understanding of this agreement, and
because we had reason to believe that Nosenko was a conscious
and willing agent of a hostile intelligence service, we
ensured that he was under our direct observation and control
at all times from the moment of his arrival in the United
12
SECRET
1
!
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_185.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
:
this implied, it was apparent that great practical problems
stood in the way of his deportation to either the USSR or a
third country.
tors.
USSR: Nosenko has categorically stated on numerous
occasions that he will never contemplate return to the USSR,
and, although we suspect that he might secretly welcome such
a move, we would expect him to act out his part to the end
with loud protests that he was being shipped to his death,
ctc. When the possibility of expulsion was discussed with
Department of State officials in 1964, both the Secretary of
State and Ambassador Thompson expressed their concern for
the adverse effect this might have on other potential defec-
Forcible repatriation of political refugees is against
long established U.S. policy, and would be certain to arouse
violent reaction from ethnic minority groups in the United
States. Under these circumstances an alleged "confession"
by Nosenko would have come under very close scrutiny, and
might have backfired very badly. Another point that had to
be considered was the possibility that the Soviets, again
playing their part, might have refused to accept Nosenko on
the grounds that he has renounced his Soviet citizenship.
Third Country: Although we believed it likely that
Nosenko would accede to deportation to a third country,
14
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_184.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
States. From 12 February to 4 April 1964 it was possible to
keep Nosenko at a location where he could enjoy a certain
amount of movement and of contact with the outside world.
After 4 April 1964, for reasons explained above, it was
necessary to keep him incommunicado at a location which is
known to no one outside of the Agency (and to very few within
it). Authorization for Nosenko to remain in this country
under the Special Agreement Procedures was periodically
extended by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Although his freedom of movement had been severely
restricted, Nosenko was not maltreated and he made no com-
plaint about his treatment. On the contrary, we had several
written statements from him in which he stated that our
handling of him was justified and even beneficial.
Disposal
From the time that Nosenko was brought to this country
we thought about the possibility of his eventual deportation
as a contingency measure. In carly 1964, we thought that it
might be possible to mitigate the political and propaganda
drawbacks of a forced deportation by announcing that Nosenko
has confessed his true KGB role. With the passage of time,
however, and in view of our much firmer conclusions about his
real role and mission and our clearer understanding of what
13
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_182.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
-
to have the time to analyze and resolve this case, and to
plan and execute appropriate countermeasures, it was essential
that we attempt to keep the KGB from learning of our awareness
of Nosenko's true status. Consequently, detailed knowledge
of the depth and scope of our suspicions about Nosenko, and
the implications thereof, was restricted to a very few people
in the Agency and the intelligence community. Nonetheless,
we did advise key policy echelons and principals in the intel-
ligence community, even though this carried the inevitable
risk of leakage.
Soviet Inspired Inquiries
!
In 1966 there were several indications that the Soviets
were making a serious effort to find out what happened to
Nosenko and to force him to the surface. The most blatant
and unusual of these was the approach by a Soviet journalist,
Yuriy KOROLEV (a known KGB agent), to the French magazine
Paris Match with an offer to provide photographs and materials
for an exclusive story of Nosenko and his family. According
to Korolev, Nosenko's wife was considering an approach to an
international juridicial organization in an effort to obtain
compensation from Nosenko for damages caused by his abandon-
ment of her and her children. In responding to this approach
we quoted a statement, purporting to be from Nosenko himself,
i
11
SECRET
:
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_186.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
there is certainly no country in the free world on which we
could conceivably have unloaded Nosenko without first inform-
ing them of his true status. Even if we considered this a
desirable objective, it seemed certain that the Department
of State would veto such a piece of intergovernmental duplic-
ity on the basis of the political risks involved.
15
SECRET
:
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_181.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
aspects of our handling Nosenko with them. After a long
meeting with Sullivan and other FBI representatives to review
Nosenko's case on 1 April 1964, the FBI interposed no objec-
tions to our proposal to restrict Nosenko's movements and
commence hostile interrogation. Subsequently, the FBI for-
mally agreed with our findings on Nosenko, at least to the
extent that "On considering carefully the results of your
interrogations of Yuriy Nosenko and your analysis of his
statements and activities, it does appear he is not what he
purports to be. While this Bureau is not in a position to
draw any conclusion in this case, we do recognize it is
possible that Nosenko could be a Soviet plant or agent pro-
vocateur."
The then Acting Attorney General Mr. Nicholas Katzenbach
(and several members of his staff) were apprised of our res-
ervations about Nosenko on 2 April 1964 and an opinion was
sought from him both as to interpretation of the exclusion
and parole agreement, and as to how we should proceed in the
event that it proved necessary to deport Nosenko from this
country.
Efforts to Keep the KGB from Learning of Our Awareness of
Noserio's True Status
From the time we learned that Nosenko had been sent to
this country on a KGB mission it was obvious that if we were
10
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_188.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel
-
SUBJECT
Nosenko
191275
11/5-04
:
Attached is a report from the Office of Security concerning the aware.
ness of other Federal, authorities (USIB, State, FBI, and I&NS). We have
been advised by ADD/O that Nosenko at all times was advised that he could
elect to leave the U. S., but that he could not be ensured of immediate
liberty if he elected to stay; in a sense, we are told, he elected to stay under
the conditions then prevailing. We do not yet have documentation on this
latter point, other than as shown in the attachment.
S. D. Breckinridge
Attachment: a/s
SIEDET
2
L
013.42
:
=
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_187.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO
:
L
NOSENKO is a Soviet intelligence officer who defected
in Switzerland in 1964. He was subsequently brought to the
U.S., and after a short period of relative freedom, he was
confined under strict and relatively austere conditions
Commencing in
for a period of approximately three years.
1967, he was given increasing amounts of freedom until he
freedom in 1969. He subsequently married
was allowed total freedom in 1969.
a U.S. citizen, rettled in the Southeastern United States
He is presently under
⚫itizen in 1974.
and became a U.S.
contract to the Agent, providing consultative services
and information on subjects germane to his background.
NOSENKO was confined when as a result of his debriefing
substantive questions were raised concerning his bona fides,
NOSENKO's debriefing
and his general behavior raised further concern about his
emotional health and general safety.
The advice of the
and confinement were ended when it was concluded that he
✓ his confine-
was not a threat to national security.
infing.
Justice Department was obtained at the time of the
ment, and the FBI participated in his subsequent debri
NOSENKO's initial entry into the U.S. was coordinated wit..
the Department of State, and they were periodically advised
of his status during his confinement up to the time of his
final settlement.
-h
The strict conditions of NOSENKO's confinement were
intended to convey to him the seriousness of his position
as a suspected disinformation agent and to make clear to him that
his free settlement in the U.S. was precluded as long as
It was understood, however,
this issue was unresolved.
that at any time he could have elected to end his confine-
OS files do not document.
ment and return to the Soviet Union.
that this latter condition was explicitly conveyed to
NOSENKO, however, it is the recollection of senior staff
officers (ADD/O and D/OS) that such was the case, and further
that it was a condition routinely applied to other defectors.
whose bona fides were in doubt.
STORET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
1
!
j
Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO (Aka: Yuri NOSSENKO)
30 October 1927
Male
Soviet
Nicolayev, Ukraine, USSR
Brown Blue/Gray 5ft. 11 inches
Divorced
Caucasian

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_191.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
31 December 1974
13 7-15
70
NDUI
MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel
SUBJECT
: Office of Security reports on PARAGON,
NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX I and II
and MOCKINGBIRD
1.
Forwarded herewith is a 31 December 1974 memorandum
from the Acting Director of Security on subject activities. The
material represents responses to questions posed by your office.
Obviously, the next phase of the investigation will require more
detailed reviews of each activity.
2. Questions that occur to us in reading the attached, are:
:
PARAGON
We should spell out what is meant by the
statement that the FBI "deferred further coveragė
to the Office of Security," how it was expressed and
what form it took.
The taping of two conversations does not seem
to constitute "electronic surveillance" in the usual
sense. It certainly is not trespatory surveillance.
A little more detail on the equipment will be wanted.
NOSENKO
We will go to the DDO for any record of DCI
knowledge, and report such information as we get.
AELADLE
We will want to verify DDCI's approval of entry.
i
2 930
. CL

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_190.jpeg ---
14-00000
EVES 2
SECRET
of the KG3 operation against U. S. Professor Sarghoora
which NOSENKO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEMICHASTNIY, the Chairman of the Committes
for State Security (KGB).
5. During those most recent meetings NOSENKO announced.
his desire to leave the US52 permanently and seek his future
In the Most. He claimed his new work in the XC3 (First
Deputy Chief of that department charged with the survellianco.
and recruitment of American visitors to the USSR) was ax-
panding and that he would not be able to visit the Most
with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a request for
political asylum in the United States. He was taken to
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing interro-
gation. Plans are now being made to remove his to the U. S.
6. It should be noted that CIA contact with Subject
has not been extensive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides.
It should also be noted that NOSENKO's duties were not con-
cerned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conference,
and he thared to be able to shed auch, it
any, light on that area of our interest.
..7. The possibility that NOSENKO's defection was dis-
signed to wreck the conference was most carefully considered.
The decision to accept bis was taken on the conviction that.
the Soviets would not have chosen such a vulnerable agent
(staff officer of the KGB) for this kind of move.
Marshall S. Carter
Lloutenant Canoral, USA
Deputy Director
X
i
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_192.jpeg ---
14-00000
CELOTEX I
SECRET
☐
☐
L
tar
We will want more detail on the actual
surveillance, including possible higher approval.
This is responsive to the DCI's request for
newspaper articles that led to the surveillance.
CELOTEX II
1
Questions similar to CELOTEX I.
:
We may want actual copies of newspaper.
stories for display, in addition to memos,
DCI wish to use it.
should
1
j
:
MOCKINGBIRD
No recorded (in CIA) formal approval by
Attorney General. It may be that Justice will
have a copy. ·
Does this raise a question of surveillance
of congressmen if one is contacted by someone
under surveillance?
3. Security experts to have reports on Maheu, SIESTA,
REDACCI, surveillance trucks, and Israeli COMINT by COB
Thursday..
i
Attachments a/s
Bud
S. D. Breckinridge
->
· 2 ·
->
EYES COLLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_193.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGRET
EYES ONLY
1
31 DEC 1974
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Inspector General
VIA
: Deputy Director for Administration
SUBJECT
:
PARAGON
NOSENKO
AELADLE
CELOTEX I
CELOTEX II
MOCKINGBIRD
1. Attached is a report concerning Subject topics
which was requested by Mr. Scott Breckenridge of your office.
As you will note, the report is in a question and answer
format with attachments.
2. This Office is still gathering material in regard
to the SIESTA Project and REDFACE I. In addition, other
files are being culled to provide more details, if they exist,
on the above mentioned projects.
/
Sedures;
S
4%
Sidney Stembridge
Acting Director of Security (
Atts
Distribution:
Original
-
Adse
1
-
DDA
EYES ONLY
☐☐☐
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 010249
2
W

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_189.jpeg ---
14-00000
CENTRAL
P.NCH
AQERICY
.
TOR SECRET
AYES ONLY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 23, D. C
1
OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
individ
12 February 1964
HEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
United States Intelligence Board Hembers.
Yuri Ivanovich HOSENZO
P
1
1. This memorandum refers to the State Department
release of 10 February on subject case and provides addi-
tional background as well as information on his current
status..
20 As a KGB staff officer, NOSENKO is regularly.
assigned to the Counterintelligence Directorate of tho
KGB in Moscow but was included in the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover arrзage-
ment which permitted his to carry out intelligence and..
security functions in Goneys on behalf of the XG3.
Katso various sessions of the
Disarmament Conforence held in Geneva in 1962. During the
course of these sessions, NOSENKO sought contact with
officials of the U. 5. Government, informed these officials
that he was affiliated with the Soviet State Security ap-
paratus and volunteered to aid the U. S. Government in
detecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the
U. S. Coverment. During the course of his contact with
U. E. anthorities, NOSENIG stated that his cooperation with
the U.. S. Government originated with his distaste and hatred
for the Soviet regime in general, with his desirɔ to obtala
revenge for the unjust death of his father, a senior official
ia the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general*
admiration of the Americans with whom he had como in con-
tact within the Soviet Unica.
4. In late January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Geneva,
again masquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation
to the Disamament Conference. Subject secretly notified
his CLA contacts in the United States concerning his pres-
ence in Geanya and arranged to best with these contacts.
During a serius of meetings NOSENKO provided information
including documents concerning Soviet State Security acti-
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detailed account
E2 IMPDET.
NAT SECRET CL BY 063344
FYES DALY
HR 10-23
9 January 1975

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_194.jpeg ---
14-00000
REPUEST
;
I, Yurly Ivanovich Rosenko, request the Government of
the United States of America to grant me political asylwi
This decision has been
in the United States of America.
taken by ne as the result of considering this question
over the course of several years without any pressure on
the part of anyone whosoever. I absolutely do not believe
in the truth of the Socialist system. working in the KGB
and knowing more than the ordinary Soviet citizen about
the internal situation, the mood of the people and the
policies of the Soviet Government, I became convinced that.
in the USSR there is not and never will be truth and real
freedom as long as the country is governed by the Communist
Party. Travelling on official trips abroad to the countries
of the west, I was able correctly to understand and become
aware of the existence of a real and actual free world.
The events in Hungary and East Berlin and the split of the
Communist movement are for me vivid examples and confirma-
tion of the correctness of ay own decision to break forevor
with the Soviet Union. I want to assure the Covernment of
the United States of America that I will devote all my
strength and knowledge to the Goverment and people of the
United States of America.
1.1.
To
4 February 1964
/s/ Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenio
:
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_195.jpeg ---
}
7
,
"
"
Que possess
predala anal,
Si nëcurity to be eitt veggen -
Neamvare y
10.020848
3:
« Deal
facture pagelib orkesomeli receding o siyapë-
Alat zergejus, specifi #paj z liative.
peleatonive ipabuttonbus & ytiques
Ini x 30
wood Heat wife Galeri sayed bug
exp ppcloquat sepeded weeway -
Hussies). Prespa Penziju pobie
Onquitu Sestage & excer tipelinesste letten?
a cockmant spigiwakiliate pisseries a godaalu –
6
• ulme croptopage startasi
alants & Resiprece
C
7
C
Ko take beca
2227
glujoma alaenuine g
prati pa que profit
protest
obrze zroka mummad wendy capituba wy
4 Clement Consola.
Cory antiper Spendants
.>
&
For his crently upery
14-00000

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_197.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
EN WITNESS WHEREOF. I have hereunto set my hand and seal
2.1
this
day of
Mowi
1969.
//
IDEN 1
(L.S.)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 2/2 day uf
a
☐ 1969.
(SEAL).
:
isi IDEN 7
Notary Public
My commission expires September 24, 1963
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_196.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNDERTAKING RE
NG OBLIGATIONS AND SECRECY
1
in consideration of arrantements being made by the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY for my future employment and welfare, I freely
acknowledge that I have nó outstanding claims of any nature against the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. 1 further acknowledge that there
are no commitments to me on the part of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY which remain unsatisfied arising out of any of my prior
associations with the Agency. I fully understand that the current arrange-
ments between myself and the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY are
intended to completely encompass all obligations of any nature whatsoever
made to me by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
1
1 acknowledge my desire to serve the interests of the United States
by fulfilling the obligations which I have accepted in the current
arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. I assert
under oath, as indicated by my signature below, that I have completely,
totally and permanently severed any and all relationships with any other
government, its agencies, organs or functionaries including the Communist
Party; that I will not in the future advocate, teach, or become a member
of or become affiliated with any organization which advocates or teaches
opposition to all organized government; that I will not in the future become
a member of or become affiliated with the Communist Party or any other
totalitarian party; and that I do not now nor will I in the future advocate
the economic, international, and governmental doctrines of world
communism,
I understand fully the need for secrecy regarding my past,
present and future relationships with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY and I agree to keep forever secret these relationships and
my arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY including
all information which I may obtain by reason of any associations with
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, with full knowledge that
violation of such secrecy may subject me to criminal prosecution under
the espionage laws (18 U.S. C. 793, 794) and other applicable laws and
regulations. I understand that this is a solen and permanent undertaking
which I must observe even after termination of any contracts or other
arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. In addition,
I understand that I may not discuss with or disclose to any person not
authorized to hear it any information concerning the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, its activities, or intelligence material under
the control of the Agency. I understand that the burden is upon me to
ascertain from the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY whether or not
information is classified and if so, who is authorized to receive it.
I take the obligations set forth above freely, without any mental
reservations or purpose of evasion.
:
.1
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_198.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
W
IDEN
Dear
IDEN 1
The UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, as represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, hereby contracts with you under
the following terms and conditions:
1. STATUS. Your legal status under this contract is that of an
independent contractor or consultant. You are not considerad an
employee of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this
contract. You will be required to hold yourself available at all times
to fulfill requests made of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
or to respond to tasks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY. You will refrain from engaging in other gainful employment
or occupation until approval has been received from the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. Instructions furnished to you pursuant to
this contract and within the terms hereof shall be as binding upon you...
as if included in the written terms hereof.
2. COMMUNICATION.
In all relationships with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, tasks and relevant
instructions from an individual hereinafter referred to as the
"Authorized Government Representative." He will be fully authorized
to discuss matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this
i
contract including, but not limited to, cover arrangements, place of
assignment, conditions of work or any other matters relating to your
relationship with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
3. COVER AND SECURITY. In the performance of your
responsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangements will be made
regarding cover and general security conditions.
You may be required
→
"

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
SUBJECT, (Ophone!)
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
☐ SECRET
KOUTING AND RECORD SHEET
FROM:
Rodger S. Gabrielson
OLC/C&R
TO) (Officer designation, room number, and
building)
Mr. N. Shepanek.
1.
MANDRAX**X
EXTENSION
NO.
REF TO: Con. No. TS191722
thrữ C
1133/ Dark
19 June 1978
DATE
OFFICER 3
INITIALS
RECEIVED PORWARDED
SA/DO/O Tube: 0x0 Green
2.
Mr Jack Gattivan
Tube
3.
g
4.
.3.
6.
Mr. Hat
winget
7.
Rodigar
Haboulson
8.
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
whom. Drow a line across column after each comment.)
Attached is a letter
from the House Select
Committee on Assassinations
dated
Please respond as soon as
possible.
Shep: Please have CI look
at this. It's the T.S. material
from Deryabin's safe
by Blakey. Thanks,
-
request.
Rodge
+ 7. cistaff
be
own to Blakey
may
9.
10.
11.
12.
!
13.
14.
15.
FORM
3-02
610
USE PREVIOus
EDITIONS
SECRET
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
☐
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
!
:
:
:
xalternitzzy

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_200.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE. In the interests of security, you will
be required to live in such State, area, and house or apartment as is
specifically approved by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY after
mutual discussion and due consideration of all circumstances,
All of
the expenses of such leased house or apartment will be borne by you and
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will not be obligated to pay any
such expenses,
6. ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
course of fulfilling your responsibilities under this agreement, monetary
allowances would be payable under general UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary
allowances in substantial accordance with those laws and regulations.
If, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are
authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expenses will
be made by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial
accordance with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
regulations.
7. HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL CARE. The CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will provide you with reasonable insurance
covering medical care and hospitalization equivalent to that which could
be obtained through standard insurance policies; or, the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY may provide directly such medical care and
hospitalization.
8. SECRECY OBLIGATION.
You will be required to keep forever
secret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason
hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledge that violation of such
-3-
:
I

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_199.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover-
arrangements but it is to be expressly understood that such docu
documenta
are solely for the purpose of cover and security and confer no additional
legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and obligations with
respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY derive solely from
this agreement. In connection with cover and security you will be
provided from time to time specific instructions by the Authorized
Government Representative and you will be required to adhere precisely
to such instructions.
4. COMPENSATION. You will be compensated by the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY at the rate of Sixteen Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($16, 500.00) per year. Payment of this compensation thall be
monthly in accordance with arrangements acceptable to the Authorized
Government Representative. This sum is subject to Federal income
taxes and to such income tax laws as are applicable to your place of
residence. Additionally, this compensation is subject to FICA taxes.
The current rates and method of payment will be in accordance with
applicable laws and the security instructions issued by the Authorized
Government Representative. To assist you in establishing yourself, the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will assist you in procuring an
automobile and necessary household furnishings, providing funds therefor,
up to a maximum of Eight Thousand Dollars ($8,000.00). Payment of all
taxes and preparation of necessary tax returns are your personal
obligation and responsibility but in accord with appropriate security
instructions which will be furnished by the Authorized Government
Representative.
-2-
i

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_201.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
secrecy may subjects
under the espionage laws.
as amended, and other applicable laws and regulations. Your relationship
with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and this contract must be
kept secret and you may not discuss any aspect of this relationship and
contract with any person other than the Authorized Government
Representative or such other person as he may specifically approve.
No promises or
9.
UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS.
commitments pertaining to rights, privileges, or benefits other than those
expressly stipulated in writing in this agreement or any amendment thereto
shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
10. TERM. This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1969
and shall be for a term of one (1) year. At the end of that period this
contract shall be deemed to be renewed for another year unless notice of
termination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance of the
elapse of one (1) year. Thereafter the contract will be renewed automatically
on similar terms and conditions. This contract may be terminated at any
time by either party upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice. Upon
termination of this contract or renewals thereof, including amendments,
if any, the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake to assist
you in obtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensation
to assure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of
living. This undertaking is contingent upon your fulfilling the terms of
this contract and the continuing compliance with the secrecy obligations
i
-4-
i

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_202.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
:
-1
:
:
imposed on you by paragraph 8 of this cor
and tha provisions of
any secrecy agreement which you have signed with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
Date:
ACCEPTED:
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
As Represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
By:
Contracting Officer
21 April, 1869
/s/ IDEN 1
Date:
WITNESS:
21 april 1969
Date:
Isl IDEN 7
i
-5-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECNET
BIOGRAPHIC DATA
SUBJECT)
AXAS
DPOB
MARITAL STATUS:
COLDNEMI
EDUCATION)
Yuziy Ivanovich KOSZNZO
Turi NOSSENKO
35 October 1927, Nicolayev, Ukraine, UZSK
1946 – Married and divorced Flavia
-
MOSIMEO (New: SHISHOY).
1946 – Married Augustine K. KOSENZO
(7601 TZLIGIM), 1949 - 3«parated and,
1951 – diverend.
-
23 June 1993 - Married Ludmila Tallaecina
TIQSINKO (76) KOZHETNIKOVA), January
1964 - 7azeled and 1769 - Divorced
Daughters - Czana NOSENED, born 11 August
1954, Moscow; Tamara XOPENKO, bern
13 Jały 1958, Mosesw. (Both living in USAR)
1942-1943 - Attended various USSR Naval
Schools.
1948-1959 - Attended Institute of Interna-
tional Relations, Moscow,
EMPLOTMEN
March 1951-March 1993 – Soviet Naval RU
(Naval Intelligence).va
MILITART:
MATIONALITY)
PRESENT AND FAST
POLITICAL AFFIL-
LATIONS:
March 1933–Februszy 1954 - Officer is XCD.
(The Comsaltian for Stats Jaearity)..
Lissienant in C3SR Navy while in school and
during 103 service.
Soviet
1941-1954 - Member Komsomol, 03:2
1756)
1957-1964
-
· Candidata Compreist Party
Member Commmist Pesty, US32
SECRET
HP 1
i.
-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_206.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
!!
SEOPET
(
this contract and the continuing compliance with the secrecy obligations
impored on you by paragraph of this contract and the provisions of any
secrecy agreement which you have signed with the CENTRAL.
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Date:
ACCEPTED:
/B/
WITNESS:
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
As Represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
By:
:
IDEN 6
Contracting Officer'
IDEN 1
March 6, 1970
Date:
/s/ IDEN 2
Date: 6 Ijjšavali 1970
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_204.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
.
:
;
:
'
SECRET
COMPENSATION. You will be compensated by the CENTRAL
INTELLIGERCE AGENCY at the rate of Fighteen Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($18, 500, 00) per year. Payment of this compensation shall be
monthly in accordance with arrangements acceptable to the Authorized
Goverment Representative. This sum is subject to Federal income taxo
and to such income tax laws as are applicable to your place of residence.
Additionally, this compensation is subject to FICA taxes, The current
rates and method of payment will be in accordance with applicable laws and
: the security instructions issued by the Authorized Government Representative,
Payment of all taxes and preparation of necessary tax returns are your
i personal obligation and responsibility but in accord with appropriate security
instructions which will be furnished by the Authorized Government
| Representative.
5. ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
course of fulfilling your responsibilities under this agreement, monetary
allowances would be payable under general UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary
allowances in substantial accordance with those laws and regulations.
If, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are
authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expenses will be
made by the CENTRAL. INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial accordance
with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY regulations.
6. NEGOTIATED BENEFITS.
-
a.
You presently have a private health insurance plan for
yourself and your wife paid until late December 1970. Prior to
the expiration date of the current policy the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY has the option of paying premiums
on the current policy until 1 March 1972 or enrolling you in a
health insurance program for selected contract individuals
of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY subject to
all the terms and conditions of that program. The CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will pay the premiums on either.
insurance coverage until 1 March 1972. However, any new
contract will include an appropriate clause providing that this
organization will bear a portion of the total premium cost of
any health insurance and you will bear the remainder.
b. The CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will endeavor
to arrange for you to secure a term life insurance policy with
a face value of $15,000.00. This policy contains no additional
accidental death benefits. The premiums for the policy will
be your personal responsibility. The current prémium charge
is $12.00 per month,
--
SECRET
:
|
I

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_207.jpeg ---
14-00000
25 October 1972
Received this date from an Authorized Government Repre-
sentative three Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on the following banks:
#AI 25-349
Schroder Trust Company
$15,000.00
#FE 54779
Morgan Guaranty Trust Co.
10,000.00
#A593613
Harris Trust & Savings Bank
10,000.00
This is an advance against a back salary payment covering
the period April 1964 to March 1969 which was approved on 18 October
1972. I understand that this advance, $35,000.00, will be deducted
from the total back salary payment covering the specified period when
the finalization of this payment is made in the near future.
isl
IDEN 1
/s/ IDEN 5
Catuler 25, 1977
Witness
;
Date:
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_208.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
16 NOV 1972
Received this date from an Authorized Government Repre-
sentative four Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on the following banks:..
#15578+
Riggs National Bank
$15,000.00
#01-028564
Union Trust Company
15,000.00
#0661511
American Security & Trust
15,000.00
#2-442275
The National Bank of Washington 7,052.00
The above aniount, $52,052,00, together with the $35,000.00
advance received on 25 October 1972, constitutes full payment for back
salary covering the period April 1964 to March 1969.
!
Witness:
isl
IDEN 1
/s/ IDEN 5
Date:
Morever 16, 1872.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_205.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
"
SEGRET
sent to the portion of vark you are herein
authorized twenty-one (21) whch dayn vacation with pay per
confree! year to be fakere only at times and places approved
in advance by the Authorized Government Representative,
Vacation time is not ate ruable and will and be carried-over
from year to year.
Payment for unused vacation time will
not be authorized,
(2) If incapacitated for work due to illness, injury
and the like, your compensation may be continued for periods
not to exceed a total of thirteen (13) working days per contract
year. Periods of absence in excess of three (3) consecutive
days will require a doctor's certificate. Like vacation time,
this benefit is not accruable and will not be carried over from
year to year. Cash payment in lieu of this benefit will not be
authorized.
7. SECRECY OBLIGATION. You will be required to keep forever
Becret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason
hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE ·
AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledge that violation of such
secrecy may subject you to criminal prosecution under the espionage lawn,
as amended, and other applicable laws and regulations. Your relationship
with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and this contract must be
kept secret and you maỷ not discuss any aspect of this relationship and
contract with any person other than the Authorized Government
Representative or such other person as he may specifically approve.
8. UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS. No promises or
commitments pertaining to rights, privileges, or benefits other than those
expressly stipulated in writing in this agreement or any amendment thereto
shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
9. TERM. This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1970 and
ghall be for a term of two (2) years, At the end of that period this contract
shall be deemed to be renewed for another year unless notice of
termination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance.
Thereafter the contract will be renewed automatically on similar terms
and conditions. This contract may be terminated at any time by either
party upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice. Upon termination
of this contract or renewals thereof, including amendments, if any, the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake to assist you in
obtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensation to
jassure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of
living. This undertaking is contingent upon your fulfilling the terms of
:
1969
SECRET.
1
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_203.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
IDEN I
Dear IDEN 1
1:
N
at made to your contract with the UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT, on represente by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
envctive l Aturca 1969. Effective 1 March 1970 said contract is herein
terminated by mutuel censent of the parties thereto, and in lien thereof
the following agreement in substituted.
The UNITED STATÈS GOVERNMENT, as represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLICENCE AGENCY, hereby contracts with you under
the following terms and conditions:
1. STATUS. Your legal status under this contract is that of an
independent contractor or consultant. You are not considered an employec
of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this contract. You
will be required to hold yourself available at all times to fulfill requests
made of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY or to respond to
tasks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. You
will refrain from engaging in other gainful employment or occupation until
approval has been received from the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
Instructions furnished to you pursuant to this contract and within the terms
hereof shall be as binding upon you as if included in the written terms
hereof.
2. COMMUNICATION. In all relationships with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, tasks and relevant
instructions from an individual hereinafter referred to as the "Authorized
Government Representative." He will be fully authorized to discuss
matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this contract
including, but not limited to, cover arrangements, place of assignment,
conditions of work or any other matters relating to your relationship with
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
3. COVER AND SECURITY. In the performance of your
responsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangements will be made
regarding cover and general security conditions. You may be required
to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover
arrangements but it is to be expressly understood that such documents are
solely for the purpose of cover and security and confer no additional
legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and obligations with
respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY derive solely from this
agreement. In connection with cover and security you will be provided
from time to time specific instructions by the Authorized Government
Representative and you will be required to adhere precisely to such
instructions.
q
(1
SECRET
4:1
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_209.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNITED
ED LAWYES (VERNMENT
Memorandum
10
Files
1
120M
:
IDEN 2
i
SUBJECT:
IDEN 1
DATE: 13 July 1973
1. On 12-July 1973, the attached Acknowledgement and
Release which was prepared by the General Counsel was signed by
the Subject in the presence of IDEN 5 and witnessed by the
undersigned. There were no problems involved in obtaining the
signature of the Subject who had previously voluntarily stated he
would sign such a document if he would receive the $15,000.00 which
Subject considered was the fulfillment of an Agency promise in 1964:
before his defection.
2. Subject understood that the attached did not affect the
existing contractual agreement with Subject and that all stipulations
in that contract were valid and continuing.
3. Also attached is a copy of the $13,000.00 Cashier's
Check given to Subject on 12 July 1973 which completed the agreed
sum of $15,000.00, the Subject having previously received $2,000.00
which was a part of the agreed sum.
' /s/ IDEN 2.-
Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_212.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
PEFECTORS
TAB
TITLE
DATE
1
Memo for Mr. Garrison from S. D. Breckinridge, Subje
Information on Detention of Defector
30 Jan 75
4
2
3
-
Memo for IG from Jerrold F. Brown, Subj: Request for
Information (re: Report that DCI fired an exployee
for abusing a defector)
MFR from Walter Elder. Sabi: Rockefeller Commission
Contact (re: Report that PCT fired an employee for
abusing a defector)
Memo for IG from C. W. Kane. Subi: Alleged Illegal
Activities (Unidentified Subject Alleged Abone of
Defector)
--
Routing Slip to S. Breckinridge from F. Buecí
Att: Memorandum of Agreement Between the Attorney General
of the United States and the Central Intelligence Agency
for the Entry of Aliens of Interest to the Central
Intelligence Agency under Specific Circumstances
Nomo for Inspector General from Jerrold B.Brown, dated
18 Juno 1975, Subject: Request for Information
(ro- DCI firing an employee for abusing a defector)
18 Jun 75:
23 Jun 75
27 Jun 75
22 Jan 75
10 Feb 55
18 June 1975
t
1
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
Falcon PR AS LInter
SECRET
SP-1687
18 JUL 1969
Mr. Raymond F. Farrell
Commissioner of Immigration
and Naturalization
Department of Justice
Washington, D. C.
Attention: Mr. Frank E. Bartos
Dear Sir:
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO
Reference is made to previous correspondence
in this case.
Subject continues to be of operational interest
to this Agency. Therefore, it is requested subject's
parole to this Agency be extended for an additional
period of six (6) months beyond the expiration date of
his stay of 16 August 1969.
Your cooperation in this matter is very much ap❤
preciated.
Sincerely,
SIGNED
1
-
Victor R. White
Deputy Director of Security
(Investigations and Operational Support)
OS/AAS/LW:es 16 July 1969
(MOT TO BE DISSEMINATED FURTHER OR SYSIBITED
TO ANYONE HITMONT PRIOR PERMISSICH OF THE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
SECRET
12 1
Gui
67919e

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_213.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Reficta
Review Staff: 75/880
Mr. Ryan
INERICTON CINN
75-2.2%
18 June 1975.
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Inspector General
SUBJECT
:
Request For Information
The Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
says the DCI fired an employee for abusing a de-
fector. Can you uncover the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known to us? (John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of "any piece of paper" sent to the
Commission on the reported incident or of any
others. He suggests checking Office of Security)
BB
Jerrold B. Brown
CC:
DDO
John Waller
SECRET
axil
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_211.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐
☐
:
t
:
:
Dear
IDEN 1
IDEN 1
Reference is made to your contract with the United States Government,
'as
as represented by the Central Intelligence Agency, effective 1 March 1970.
Effective 1 March 1974, said contract is amended by revising the first
sentence of paragraph four (4) entitled "Compensation" to read as follows:
effect.
"You will be compensated by the Central Intelligence Agency
at the rate of Twenty-Three Thousand Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars
($23,750) per year."
All other terms and conditions of said contract remain in full force and
Please acknowledge by signing in the space provided below.
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
BY /s/ IDEN 3
Special Contracting Officer
ACCEPTED:
// IDEN 1
George Martin Rosnek
WITNESS:
May I 1971
Date
/ɛ/ IDEN 2
APPROVED:
/s/ IDEN 4
:
9/may 1974
Date
17374
Date
52IMPDET
CL by: 063837.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_210.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
WHEREAS,
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND RELEASE.
IDEN 1
a former citizen of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Repablies and an employee of the Committee for State
Security (KGB), first cooperated with Officers of the United States Govern-
ment and then, subsequently, defected to the United States; and,
WHEREAS,
JDEN 1
.
was promised certain sums of money for
his cooperation and defection, only part of which have previously been
paid to him; and,
WHEREAS, there remains a certain balance of money agreed upon by
IDEN 1 and Officers of the Central Intelligence Agency;
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of FIFTEEN THOUSAND
and 00/100 Dollars ($15,000.00) the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged,
for himself and for his heirs, executors, admini-
IDEN 1
strators and assigns, hereby releases and forever discharges the United
States Government and the Central Intelligence Agency and all of its
employees and representatives from any claim for money promised to him
for, and/or at the time of his defection, and from any and all other claims
demands and liabilities in any form whatsoever arising out of or in any way
connected with his cooperation and association with the United States Govern-
ment and the Central Intelligence Agency prior to the date of this document,
12 July 1973.
WITNESS THE FOLLOWING SIGNATURE AND SEAL:
WITNESS;
On Behalf of the United States Government
/s/ IDEN 2
1
/s/ IDEN 1
(SEAL)
IDEN 1
:
D
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_214.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-:
EXHIBIT 2
!
);
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES
AND THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY FOR THE ENTRY OF ALLENS OF INTEREST TO
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY UNTER SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES
The Contral Intelligence Agency has frequent nood for the covart
termonary entry of aliens into the United States for intelligence and
operational purposes within its Jurisdiction.
To effectuate entry in such cases, the Central Intelligence Agency
will submit each such alien's case in writing to the Commissioner of.
Immigration and Naturalization with the request to defer inspection of
the subject upon arrival and parole to the Central Intelligence Agency
under the authority of Section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act.
In order that the intelligence benefits to be derived from such
entries not be outweighed by the dangers, if any, to the internal security
of the United States by the presence of such aliens, the Central Intelligence
Agency agrees that it will take all necessary steps to establish the bona
fidos of each prospective entrant prior to submittal to the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. It further agrees: (a) That this method of entry
will only be utilized where it is strictly in the national interest; (b) That
each request will be accompanied by a summary of pertinent background and blo-
graphical data with particular emphasis on aspects bearing on internal
security and a dmissibility under the immigration laws, as well as the results
of a current check of the FBI file; and (c) That the place, time and manner
of arrival will be coordinated with the Service in advance thereof.
Fach alien whose entry is authorized by the Commissioner under the
foregeing procedure will be paroled for such period of time as may be agreed
on by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Service, in no instance to
excoed one year. Further extensions of parole, similarly limited, may be
authorized thereafter on a written statement of need, which include the
results of a current security check.
Upon arrival each allen will execute an agreement acknowledging
parole status in a form satisfactory to the Central Intelligence Agency and
the Service.
After parole of such allons, the Central Intelligence Agency will
assume responsibility for care, supervision and control of a kind and degree
it believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States
during continuance of their parole status. Further, in the case of any alien
whose physical custody is not to be maintained or is to be terminated, the
Central Intelligence Agency will arrange for presentation of each alien for
registration pursuant to law at a time and place satisfactory to the Service.
'
:
=
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_215.jpeg ---
14-00000
SE-CR
EXHIBIT 2
:
Upon completion of their intelligence or operational purposes in
the United States, or if internal security reasons so require, these allens
will be removed therefrom through the arrangements and at the expense of
the Central Intelligence Agency, except in those casos in which other dis-
position is made of a nature satisfactory to the Service. Also, the Central
Intelligence Agency will inform the Service sufficiently in advance of each
proposed departure as to permit verification thereof if the Service so elects.
In accordance with past practice, the Servico will apprise the FBI of
the entry and departure or other disposition of these allons.
The Service will maintain separato and secure files under this
agreement.
Herbert Brownell, Jr.
Attorney General
.5/5
-
Allen W. Dilles
Director of Central Intelligence
(Feb 10 1955)
- 2 -
S.E.C.R-E-T

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_219.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
SECRET
10. It is noted that Office of Security files contained
only fragmentary information in regard to certain areas of the
Torpats' case.. File review indicated
File review indicated, however, the DDO, OGC
and the Inspector General's office will probably have addition-
al information concerning this matter.
:
3
SECRET
Charles W. Kane
Director of Security

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_216.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐ UNCLASSIFIED
☐
1.. RNAL
.
USE ONLY
SUBJECT. (Optional)
FROM
☐ CONF.NTIAL
☐ SECKET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
Alleged Illegal Activities
(Unidentified Subject--Alleged Abuse of Defector)
Charles W. Kane
Director of Security
EXTENSION NO
6777
DATE
27 JUN 1975
10: (Office designation, room number, and
buildingi
1.
DDA
2.
1.
4.
S.
144
RECEIVED
CAT!
WARCAD
30 JUN 1875
OFFICERS
INITIALS
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
to whom. Draw a line across column after each comment.)
Inspector General
Att:
Mr. Ainslie
n
Dr. Chamberlain
SUS
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
FORM
J-52
HiKnoche
F
3-5:
Attached was prepared in
response to an 18 June
request from Jerry Brown.
Per 23 Jun, MfR by Walt
Elder, source of the story
is a deposition by Mr. Helmst
Thi
befive possIC
101
2007
610
US
EDITIONS
SECRET
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_217.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SECRET
INSPECTOR GENERAL
719
Inspector General
17 JUN 1975
ATTENTION
:
Mr. Neil Ainslic
VIA
SUBJECT
:
Alleged Illegal Activities
: Deputy Director for Administration
(Unidentified Subject--Alleged Abuse
of Defector)
1. Reference is made to Mr. Ainslie's verbal request
for a review of Office of Security files in an effort to
provide information pertinent to a case mentioned on page
170 of the Report to the President by the Commission on CIA
activities within the United States.
2. The case in question from page 170 of the Commission
Report is quoted as follows: "In one other case, a defector
was physically abused, although not seriously injured. The
Director of Central Intelligence discharged the employee in-
volved."
3.
A search of Office of Security file resources has
reflected information pertinent to a case in which a defector
was physically abused at an overseas location, and the Agency
employee was later terminated by the DCI. It is not known
whether the following case is identical to the referenced
case on page 170 of the Commission Report, but the facts
appear to be quite similar.
4. Information developed by this Office of possible in-
terest to the Inspector General, pertains to one John Torpats,
an ex-CIA employee, and one Eduard Oun, an Estonian defector.
S.
'
Torpats was born in 1898 in Estonia, and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1926. Torpats was employed by
CIA in February 1949 and was terminated 30 January 1961.
file information reflected that in July 1956, Torpats was found
The
guilty of mistreatment of an alien by a Special Inquiry Board
:
SECRET
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 011018

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_22.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
NITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUST
IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20536
July 24, 1969
Deputy Director of Security
(Investigations and Operational Support)
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C.
Attention: Mr. Louis Wienckowski
Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nossenko,
Your SP-1687.
JAD NOTE TO THIS FUE NO.
A13 724 817
n
Dear Sir:
As you requested in your letter dated July 18, 1969, the
-subject-has-been-given-a-further-period of stay to expire on
February 16, 1970.
Sincerely,
Frank Waits
Frank E. Bartos
Chief Intelligence Officer
Field Inspection and Security Division
C.n. 16 Jan. 1970
(cc)
:102
SECRET
i
fr eutomatic
and
I

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_218.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
in Frankfurt, West Germany. The alien involved was Eduard
Oun, an Estonian who defected from Estonia through Sweden
in 1955.
6. The incident in Frankfurt involved mistreatment of
Oun during interrogations directed by Torpats. The charges
of physical abuse included the striking of Oun with the fist;
application of turpentine and ointments to various parts of
the body, the scrubbing of Oun's body with a brush, and forc-
ing Oun to stand in the nude as long as eight days during
interrogations with only very brief rest periods.
7. Torpats was returned to Headquarters and was brought
before an Employment Review Board for consideration of separa-
tion from the Agency. The Board's recommendations initially
were that Torpats be "transferred to an area outside the
Clandestine Services." Torpats appealed the decision, and a
later recommendation included reduction in grade from GS-14
to GS-13. Torpats later received unsatisfactory fitness re-
ports and engaged in various "in house" battles with Agency
officials concerning his employment.
8. Torpats was later terminated in accordince with the
authority granted the DCI under Section 102(C) of the National
Security Act of 1947, as ammended, effective 30 January 1961.
Later in 1961, Torpats filed suit against the DCI contesting
his dismissal, and the U.S. District Court for the District of
Columbia granted the government's motion for summary judgment
against Torpats. Torpats appealed the decision, and the U.S.
Court of Appeals, in 1962, upheld the lower court's ruling
that Torpats' termination was legal.
9. The Office of Security file of Eduard Oun contained
little information other than interrogation reports dated 1956.
It was not clear from file information whether Oun entered the
United States after the Frankfurt incident. The most recent
document contained in the Oun file was dated 17 September
1956 and noted that Oun had been psychiatrically examined and
found qualified for Agency sponsored immigration to the U.S.
under Public Law 203.
:
1
2
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_220.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
175-2044 2
1942
Review Staff:
23 June 1975
75/1008
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
Rockefeller Commission Contact
:
Mason Cargill told me today that the reference
in the Commission report to an employee who was fired
because he abused a defector came from a deposition by
Dick Helms: Helms could not remember an exact name,
but from the description which he gave on his deposition,
it is clear that the employee who was fired was John
Torpats. He was discharged by Allen W. Dulles in 1960.
Torpats, himself a Lithuanian refugee, was working
in the Defector Reception Center in Frankfort, Germany.
In the course of interrogating another Lithuanian
defector, Torpats beat him. After Torpats was fired,
he sued the Director (then McCone). He lost the case.
West Elder
Walter Elder
:
K
1.
CC
éc
CC
11
-
-
DCI
IG
OGC
!
SECRET
CB: 007789
E2 IMPDET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_221.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Review Staff: /5/880
Mi kijan
HISDICTOR CO
75--2.776
18 June 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
SUBJECT
:
Request For Information
The Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
says the DCI fired an employee for abusing a de-
fector. Can you uncover the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known to us? (John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of "any piece of paper" sent to the
Commission on the reported incident or of any
others. He suggests checking Office of Security)
\BB
Jerrold B. Brown
cc: DDO
John Waller
All Blardiresion.
Din't
ST-1#3
SE/DDC
C/LE
SECRET
!
:
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_222.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
1677
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Garrison
SUBJECT
30 January 1975
: Information on Detention of Defector.
1. The Deputy General Counsel has requested documents
bearing on the decision to confine a defector, particularly the
considerations at the time such decisions were made and
reviewed, as may be reflected in memoranda for the record.
staff studies, etc., leading to the initial confinement, the
later decisions to continue that confinement, the decision to
move to a new facility in Virginia, and eventually to release
him.
2. The assumption is that following the initial decision
this matter was reviewed formally from time to time, and that
those reviews are reflected in some way in the records of the
Agency.
Original - Addressee
SDB Chrono
1- Judy for QA files
7s/ S. D. Brentford
S. D. Breckinridge
C
T

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
TOP SEGHET
EYES CHLY
5. During these most recent meetings NOSENKO announced
his desire to leave the USSR permanently and seek his future
in the west. He claimed his new work in the KGB (First
Deputy Chief of that department charged with the surveillance
and recruitment of American visitors to the USSR) was ox-
panding and that he would not be able to visit the West
with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a request for
political asylum in the United Statas.
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing interro-
Ho was taken to
gation. Plans are now being made to resove him to the U. S.
6. It should be noted that CIA contact with Subject.
has not been extensive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides.
It should also be noted that NOSENXO's duties were not con-
corned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conferonce,
and he therefore is not expected to be able to shod much,
any, light on that area of our interest,
.
if
7. The possibility that NOSENKO's Jofection was de-
signed to wreck the conference was most carefully considered.
The decision to accept his was taken on the conviction that
the Soviets would not have chosen such a vulnerable agent
(staff officer of the XG3) for this kind of move,
CSR/DEM/jif 0 11 Fab 64.
Distribution:
Orig
-
Adsa
2 cc - SR/CI/X-Downey
1 cc
-
1 cc
5
->
->>>
C/CI
CSR
DD/OS
mey
Thomas H. Karazessines
- Acting Deputy Director
for Plans
TOP SECRET
EYES ONLY
"

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
j
:
of the XG3 operation against U. S. Professor Barzhoorn
which NOSENZO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEMICHASTRY, the Chairman of the Committed
for State Security (KGB).
2
r
recent
5. During these most recent meetings NOSENIO announced
his desire to leave the USSR permanently and seek his futuro
in the Nest. He claimed his now work in the XGB (First
Deputy Chief of that department charged with the surveillance
and recruitment of American visitors to the US52) was ax-
panding and that he would not be able to visit the Most
with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a request for
political asylum in the United States. He was taken to
Frankfurt, Gormany where he is currently undergoing interro-
gation. Plans are now being made to remove his to the U. S.
60
It should be noted that CIA contact with Subjoct
has not been extensive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides.
It should also be noted that NOSENKO'S juties were not con-
'corned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conforonce,
and he therefore is not expected to be able to shed such, if·
any, light on that area of our interest.
7. The possibility that NOSENXO's defection was 'dó-`
signed to wrock the conference was most carefully considered.
The decision to accept his was taken on the conviction that .
the Soviets would not have chosen such a vulnerable agent
(staff officer of the KGB) for this kind of move.
Marshall S. Carter
Lieutenant General, USA
Deputy Director
:
!

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
•TOP SECRET·
EYES ONLY
11 February 1954
:
Yuri Ivanovich NOSENKO
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Mr. McGeorge Bundy
SUBJECT:
1.
This memorandum refers to the State Department
release of 10 February on subject case and provides addi-
tional background as well as information on his current
status..
2. As a KGB staff officer, NOSENIO is regularly:
assigned to the Counterintelligence Directorate of the
XGB in Noscow but was included in the Soviet delegation.
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover arrange-
ment which permitted him to carry out intelligence and
security functions in Geneva on behalf of the KGB..
3. HOSENZO also attended various sessions of the
Disarmament Conference held in Conova in 1962. During
the course of these sessions NOSENKO sought contact with
officials of the U. S. Government, informed these officials
that he was affiliated with the Soviet State Security ap-
paratus and volunteered to aid the U. S. Government in
dotecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the
U. S. Government. During the course of his contact with
U. S. authorities NOSENKO stated that his cooperation with
the U. S. Covernment originated with his distaste and hatred
for the Soviet regime in general, with his desirs to obtain
revenge for the unjust death of his father, a senior official
in the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general
admiration of the Americans with whom he had cose in con-
tact within the Soviet Union.
'
4. In late January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Conava,
again masquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference. Subject secretly notified
his CIA contacts in the United States concerning his preso.
once in Geneva and arranged to meet with these contacts.
During a series of meetings NOSENXO provided information
including documents concerning Soviet State Security acti-
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detailed account.
of the XC3 operation against U. S. Professor Barghoora
which NOSEMKO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEMICIASTNIY, the Chairman of the Committee
for State Security (KGB).
TSP
EVES ONLY
!

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_25.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
IN
ASEJICH
TUP O
EYES ONLY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25 Q. C.
OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELUGENCE
12 February 1964
NEMORANDUM FOR:
United States Intelligence Board Members
SUBJECT1
Yuri Ivanovich NOSENKO
1. This memorandum refers to the State Department
release of 10 February on subject case and provides addi-
tional background as well as information on his current
status.
2. As a XGB staff officer, NOSENKO is regularly
assigned to the Counterintelligence Directorate of tho
XCB in Moscow but was included in the Sovist delegation
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover arrange-
sent which permitted him to carry out intelligence and.
security functions in Goneya on behalf of the KG3.
30 NOSENKO also attended various sessions of the
Disarmament Conforance hold in Geneva in 1962,
course of these sessions, NOSENKO sought contact with
During the
officials of the U. S. Government, informed those officials
that he was affiliated with the Soviet State Security ap-
paratus and volunteered to aid the U. S. Government in
detecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the
U. S. Government. During the course of his contact with
U. S. authorities, NOSENKO stated that his cooperation with
the U. S. Government originated with his distaste and hatred
for the Soviet regime in general, with his desire to obtain
revenge for the unjust death of his father, a senior official
in the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general
admiration of the Americans with whom he had come in con-
tact within the Soviet Union.
$. In late January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Geneva,
again masquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference.
his CIA contacts in the United States concerning his pres-
Subject secretly notified
ence in Geneva and arranged to meet with these contacts.
During a series of meetings NOSENTO provided information
including decuments concerning Soviet State Security acti-
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detailed account
TUP SOBRET
EYES ONLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_28.jpeg ---
14-00000
b.
'
i
1
U.S. Lets Swiss
And Red Envoys
Talk to Defector
Nosenko Again
"Voices Desire.
Fór Asylumi
- By Chalmers L. Roberts
Staff Reporta
Soviet secret police des
fector Yuri In Nosenko is
in the United States where
he was interviewed yester:
day by officials of both the
Russian and Swiss Em-
bassies..
The State Department said
each Interview lasted less than
an hour and that a Department
official was present each time:
Nosenko reaffirmed his earlier
request for astyum. in. the
United States and it will b
granted..
State Department spokesman
Richard. I. Phillips in giving
out this. Information, declined
to say where the. Interviews“
took place or to give any de
tails. Earlier he had said it
was possible that newsmen
•
here will be allowed to take
1 with Nosenka
Fuss
Soviet Kicks up Fuar
on
☐ These developments came
as the Soviet Union kicked up
a diplomatic fuss over the dis-
appearance of Nosenko
Feb. 4, from Geneva, where
The had been assigned as an
"expert" in the Soviet delega
tion at the 17-nation disarma-
meat conference.
Philipps
said he was "on temporary
'duty from KGB. (secret po-
(ice) headquarters in Mos
cow."
1 Up to yesterday Moscow
had been directing its public
diplomatic wrath at the
Swiss, charging them with
loose security. The provision
for a Swiss diplomat to inter-
view Nosenko was to assure.
the Swiss that the United
States had taken part in co
illegal act on their soil
The Swigs already had
strongly rejected the Soviet
charges.
On Wednesday, Phillips re-
See DEFECTOR, A5, Col 1
Polie
jssel fisting
2/15/64

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_27.jpeg ---
L
47
14-00-00
Nosenko's Account Disputes Charge by Soviet
By TAD SZULO
FIELLI
Defection Preceded Report
to Swise Police, Apparently
Raling Oat Negligence
Service. Officials of the State
"
Department, the Central In-
telligence Agency And the
Immigration and Naturalizatiɔn)
ince
Service were also present...
to The New York Tim
WASHINGTON, Feb. 17
Yurt I: Nosenko told a Soviet
Embassy official at there: can-
frontation here last Friday that|
ha left Switzerland on the way
to the Unitaf States 28 hours
before his defection was re- Swiss diplomat had been per
peted by the Russians to the mitted to talic separately with the Soviet diplomat during their
¡Mir. Nosenkog
businesslike conterence that huj
Swiss authorities.
-
Mr. Nosenka was described as
having been completely relaxed
(during the interview.
He is understood to have told
secret police, appeared to amount) The Soviet delegation
This statement by the former Information made available defected of his own volition.
stat: officer of the Soviet Com-today has thrown new light without any outside pressures
(mittes of, State Security, the on the defection.
inled, did not allay Soviet resent-
His statements, it was report
to a denial of the Soviet charge, Geneva, it was reported, told ment against Swiss authorities.
that the Swiss authorities had the Swiss police at 5 PM Feb. Diplomatic reports reaching the
been negligent in preventing his 5 that Mr. Nosenkoswas. miss-State Department said that So-
defection..
Ing. But Mr. Nosenko's state-viet diplomats in foreign capi-
Mr: Nosenko, who quit as a ments. In the presence of the tals continued to register com-
member of the Soviet delegation Soviet Embassy official are said plaints about alleged negligence
to the Geneva disarmament con- to have. shown that his actuallarter Mr. Nasenko's conference
ference Feb 4 was allowed to defection took place at 1. P.M. with the Soviet diplomat
meet with KaySoviet diplomat the preceding day.
here la the presence of United[:The Soviet delegation, an
States official
nounced Mr. Nosenko's disap-
dyst
The State Department an-pearance Feb:
nounced at the ume that the The meeting between.:: Mr.)
confinatation was taking place Nosenko and the "Soviet': Em-
in Washington at the request of bassy official took place in the
the Soviet. Embassy, but no headquarters of the Washing-
other details.were made public. ton field office of the m
The department said that almigration and Naturalization
qual
1965

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_33.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!
:.
TO DE CTENED BY ADDRESSES CHE
MEMORANDUM FOR: Headquarters
SUBJECT
1 July 1964
1.
: LESYPE, George M.
(Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody of)
#262 622 C SD/1
Attached are instructions and procedures to be followed in
the event of emergency situations affecting the SUBJECT's health,
safety and custody, as well as the security of the safehouse where
SUBJECT is currently being held.
2. This is to formalize instructions which, for the most part,
are already in effect and have been briefed to the personnel of the
District Field OFFICE WE are concerned with this case.
t
3. Dissemination of copies of these instructions to members of
the Special Security Detail will be made upon notification of Headquarters
approval.
Attachment:
Emergency Instructions (2)
for ope
JOHN D. NOBLE
Special Agent in Charge
2 July 64
0123-
7
;
17281
TO BE CREXID DY ADOREBUBE CHLY

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_29.jpeg ---
14-00000
•
Swiss, Soviets
See Defector
ported.. yesterday, a Soviet called in American Ambassa
1. Embassy messenger brought a dor Fay Kobler and charged
message. to the State Depart the United States' with him.
ment asking for information permissable acts fo the case.
"as to the manner in which He stopped short of kidnap
Mr. Nosenko presented him ing charge, however. Kohler
self, to the US authorities replied that on behalf of the
and requested an opportunity United States he rejected anx
to Interview" him. The De-implication of American wrong.
'partment agreed to the inter-doing.
"
view with American-officials Serious Effects Hinted
Spresent and', said Nosenko
also was agreeable:": A-reply
In Geneva Soviet officials,
•
about the defection also was including Tsarapkin himself;
given to the Soviet Embassy privately spread to the press
Also on Wednesday, in. Gen-
hints; of serious consequences.
teva, Soviet disarmament dele.
gate Semyon, Tsarapkin Soon; there were rumors that
gave newsmen an angry states Moscow would pull out its dele-
ment aimed at the Swiss and gation, but up, to last night now
charging:provocative activi such threat, had actually been
1. by unspecified Western
agents. Up to then- Tsarapkin made, according to word reach
bad been saying both private-ing Washington
ly and publicly that the No
senkor defection would not af
14. fect the disarmament talksho
In publię Tsarapkin said only
have nothing to say, Lam
Yesterday the Soviets stopped; not in the position to tell you
up their protest in two places. anything
Moscow and Geneva
--
.
At some so far unspecified
In Moscow. Soviet Foreign dates Nosenko, who had ap
Minister Andrei Gromykoparently crossed from Switzer-
land: to: France was down to
the United States is as
sumed he is in the hands of
the Central Intelligence Agen
cy the normal course for de-
fectors
·
Ocelals here yesterday
were knocking down the idea,
that he was. a particularly big
fish that he knew any atomic)
secrets or that he knew any:
thing about Soviet disarma-
ment strategy: Rather, they there had been no word up to
said, he was a KGB still 'offi
last night of the defection on
cer, a security man operating.
as-is the Soviet practice, in the Soviet radio or in the
a tight compartment. That press though word of mouth
would mean he would have reports had spread through
useful and perhaps important the capital
•
knowledge of part of the KGB," It was felt here that Moscow
but probably not much more. might have stepped up. its
Belioved Genuine
protest after Tsarapkin had
:
☐ publicly downgraded the case
It is assumed here that theția Goneva. At any rate U.S.
36-year-old Nosenko is a gen-disarmament negotiator Wil-
uine defector though the positiam C. Foster and Tsarapkin
'sibility of his being a double held another business session
agent has not been overlook in Geneva yesterday at which
ed. It also is felt here that they said the case was not dis
the Soviet. protest was cocussed.
:
stronger than, could be ex It also was noted here that)
pected The request for an the Soviet. Communist Party
interview, rare but not un-Central Committee has been;
precedented, was granted. in meeting in Moscow all this!
hopes of reciprocal treatment week. But whether the No-j
i
should the occasion arise. (senko case was, discussed was!
Moscow dispatches said not known.
folie
WASH Post
2/15/64
:
!
1
⋅
i
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_32.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE
Headquarters
10 JUL 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR
: Special Agent in Charge
District Pield Office
SUBJECT
: BESWICK, George M.
(Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody ot).
#262 622 C - 80/1
1. Reference is made to the outline of emergency instructiona
submitted by you on 1 July 1964 for Headquarters approval.
2. The plan as outlined is approved and should be implemented
immediately.
OBIASSEN: dr
DDS/10SC JULY 1964
ADDS/ICS PPLEMENTAL
ASST/IOS
C/ID
C/OSD.
DC/OSD
C/SRD
C/9:3
1 C/S3 /
C/ID/
A&TS

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
12 May 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: Acting Chief, Support Branch
FROM
SUBJECT
nat
Chief, Operational Support Division
AEFOXTROT
#262 622
¡C
ADDR/ICS
ACST/IOS
0/09
C/D
CAD
C3
C:
2 suger
18:175
1. This memorandum is primarily for the record and will
record the essence of a meeting held on the morning of 12 May.
1964, at which the following were present: Messrs. Charles Kane,
Jack Bauman, OS; Dr. Charles Bohrer, Medical Staff; Messrs.
Bagley, Karpovich (). McMahon and David Murphy, SR Division.
+
.
2. The essence of this meeting was furnished to the Acting
Chief, Support Branch on 12 May 1964, as follows:
Effective immediately or as soon as practicable, the following
procedures will apply with regard to the handling of the
Subject:
(1) Subject will receive a regular diet with modest regulated
portions. He is to have no dessert or "trimmings,"
but may have the necessary silverware with which to
eat properly. (CAUTION--Extreme care should be
exercised with regard to controlling the silverware,
and it was suggested that at least two of the guards
be required to count the silverware in and out; that
the silverware be placed on the tray in a manner
where it could be observed before the guards enter
the room, etc.)
(2) Arrangements are to be made for the installation of
adequate air-conditioning equipment to insure that a
comfortable temperature is maintained. (It is under-
stood that there is quite a bit of equipment available
through Logistics channels.)
(3) Subject is to receive a bath; change of underwear;
change of uniform; and a change of linen for his bed.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_3.jpeg ---
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OP-1)
14-00000
TOP SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED when blank--TOP SECRET When attached to Top Secret Document-Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in form is detached from controlled document.
Source
Doc. No.
-
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Dr. Dale
Copy No.
SR/CI/K
XAAZ-1724T
20° APR 1964
Repro 2
Number of Pages 38
11
Number of Attachments
114
CIA Control No.
117
REGISTRY
TS# 191722
Date Document Received
Logged By
15 PUM
1974
B
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on top of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or clatti-
fied Tẹp Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgradǝd, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA. Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnal, and those individuals whose official duties relate to the matter. Top.
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret materia
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Decret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right-hand columns.
will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left-
REFERRED TO
RECEIVED
RELEASED
Bignature
Date
Time
Date
Time
1
B
JUN
15\/1070
BEEN BY
nature
Office/Div.
Date
C
R
E
T
Office
DDP(TSCO)
Bigg
scots Brick vridge
DCT/OL Celes
DROTERO B. Longg
200/150
215
19
199
1678
7819
me 78
139
1579'
Th
DEO/ESCO B.
Bigg
207070
UN
20187090
Breckinridge or Habrilson
200/1500
TO
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this to
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for ri
By (Signature)
DOWNGRADED
camsisted of
legriate spaces below and trans.
When finished with these documents return
them to DDO/TSCO as we are the control Office
for these documents,
TS# 191722
!
i
LATEST VERSION
DATE
TS# 191722A
TS
191722B
Lived in Nikol
TS#
191722C
Entered "zero"
Moved to Lening
and then direct
then director c
cessively on Ul
Pr. Maksima Gor
(different ones
1938
Father appointe
missar of Shipt
Commissar.
Fan
at Ul. Serafimc
year school No.
Polyanka.
June
I&GT
Completed 6th
with parents whe
(40)
TOP SECRET
LEYES
ONLY
475)

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_31.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
SECRET
:
(4) Subject is to receive a haircut, the shorter the better.
(5) Subject is to receive one cigarette on 12 May 1964.
(NOTE--These changes with regard to the bath, haircut,
cigarette are not to be considered as something to be.
done on a regular schedule. We will await specific
instructions from SR Division as to when these items
are to be accomplished in the future.)
(6) Effective immediately, Dr. Bohrer will visit the
Subject only on Tuesday each week.
(7) In addition to the above, it must be emphasized that
our attitude toward the Subject will remain precisely
the same, and our security procedures, including
searches, will continue to be at maximum control.
3. It was further ascertained that we will have custody of
the Subject until at least July. It was suggested that perhaps we may
wish to explore some modifications in the assignment of personnel
or schedule of assignments. In addition, the Acting Chief, Support
Branch has suggested that immediate consideration be given to
devising necessary procedures to be followed in the event of an
emergency involving loss of control of the Subject. This should
be discussed immediately with the responsible DFO supervisors
and specific procedures devised, and all guards properly informed
as to their responsibilities in this matter.
Callik
Jack M. Bauman
Bauman/ewd(5-12-64)
SEGHET
2

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_34.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
=
;
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
Instructions and procedures are set forth below for the handling
of emergency situations such as fire, the escape or attempted escape
of SUBJECT, and the sudden illness or serious injury to the SUBJECT.
Should such situations arise, it might be necessary to call on the
Police, the Fire Department, or outside modical facilities for assistance.
It is possible that in such an event representatives of the press or
curiosity-seekers in the local community might be attracted to the site,
thereby creating security problems with respect to the custody and
protection of the SUBJECT from a publicity standpoint.
In view of the above, it is therefore imperative that these in-
structions be thoroughly understood and memorized by all personnel
assigned to the Special Security Detail on this case.
FIRE
(Main House).
1. In case of fire in the Main House, the person discovering the
fire should apply the nearest fire extinguisher, unless, in his judgment,
the fire has reached such proportions where available equipment would be
useless. Simultaneously, he should dispatch another member of the Security
Detail to alert the Senior Security Agent (SSA) and the other occupants
of the house. If no one is available in the immediate vicinity, the
person discovering the fire should alert others in the house by shouting
'FIRE".
2. Upon being notified of a fire, the SSA shall be responsible for
directing the fighting of the fire, protecting classified and sensitive
documents and equipment on the premises, calling the local Fire Department
if circumstances warrant, and evacuating personnel. Also, at the first
available opportunity, the SSA should call the SAC or ASAC, or if they
cannot be reached, a senior DFO Agent, and furnish him with all particulars
concerning the situation and the action being taken.
3.
In utilizing members of the Security Detail in fighting a fire,
it should be borne in mind that two guards must be maintained on the
third floor at all times, so long as the SUBJECT remains confined to
his quarters. If it should become necessary to remove the SUBJECT from
his quarters during an emergency, a minimum of four guards should be
present unless circumstances are such as to make this infeasible.
In

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
'-|-
'
"
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
any event, every possible security precaution should be taken during
the movement of SUBJECT, including the use of handcuffs or any other.
restraining devices deemed necessary in order to maintain proper custody
and control over the SUBJECT and prevent his escape.
in the judgment of the SSA, a fire has reached, or is likely
to reach proportions that it could not be controlled by firefighting
equipment on the premises, it shall be his responsibility to notify the
Clinton Fire Department. In this event, the Security Detail should
move with dispatch to remove the SUBJECT from the premises prior to
arrival of the Pire Department. The SUBJECT should be placed in an
automobile, accompanied by four members of the Security Detail, and
driven away from the premises. At appropriate intervals, telephone
calls should be made to the safehouse. If no answer is received, the
cognizant DEO official should be contacted for instructions as to whether
to return to the safehouse or proceed to an alternate site.
FIRE
(Tenant House).
1. In case of fire in the Tenant House, the occupants thereof
should be instructed to immediately notify the Main House and to use
any available means to combat the fire until assistance arrives, unless
the fire is out of control, in which case all efforts should be directed
towards the evacuation of the occupants of the premises. It child te
clearly understood that in no case should any of the occupants of the
Tenant House call the Fire Department. This decision is the sole respon-
sibility of the SSA.
2. Upon notification of a fire in the Tenant House, the person
notified should immediately inform the SSA and assist in the dispatching
of available personnel and fire extinguishers to combat the fire. If,
in the judgment of the SSA, the fire has reached, or is likely to reach,
proportions that it could not be controlled by the available firefighting
equipment, it shall be his responsibility to notify the Clinton Fire
Department and to take necessary precautionary measures to prevent the
observation of the SUBJECT by firemen or other unauthorized persons who
might be attracted to the scene.
-2-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_36.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
3. At the first available opportunity, the CSA should call the
SAC or ASAC, or if they cannot be reached, a senior DFO Agent, and
furnish him with full particulars cerning the situation and the
action being taken.
ESCAPE OR AN ESCAPE
ATI
1. Strict vigilance and security should be maintained on a
24 hour basis in accordance with established procedures in order to
discourage and prevent the SUBJECT's escape. If SUBJECT should make
an attempt to escape, sufficient force should be used as is necessary
under the circumstances in order to subdue the SUBJECT and maintain
custody and control over him. Egres, unnecessary brutality and the
indiscriminate use of force will not be condoned.
i
2. All personnel assigned to the Special Security Detail on duty
at the site shall be alerted by means of the emergency alarm and/or
other appropriate means, and brought into play on any escape attempt.
Should the SUBJECT succeed in escaping from the house proper, the SSA.
shall be responsible for coordinating and directing a hot pursuit of
the SUBJECT by all means available.
3. The use of firearms should be scrupulously avoided except in
extreme circumstances of self-defense. However, the SSA under circum-
stances that indicate there are no other means of preventing SUBJECT's
total escape, may direct a qualiNei Nirearms-trained agent to fire
shots over SUBJECT's head followed by verbal warning to halt.
In no
event, except in self-defense as stated above, will an agent shoot
directly at the SUBJECT.
4. At the first available opportunity, the SAC/DFO, or in his
absence, one of the ASACs, should be telephonically advised of all
the circumstances surrounding an escape attempt. In no case shall
the Police be notified unless authorized by the SAC or ASAC.
:
ILLNESS OR DARY
1. In case of sudden illness or serious injury to the SUBT,
Dr. Charles BOHRER, or other physician designated by him in the event
P

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_39.jpeg ---
i
14-00000
:
i.
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
1.
2.
3.
SPECIAL CONTACTS
George PANEGAULIS, Chief of Folice, Prince Georges County.
(Personally known to SNODDY under GOLIATH)
Lieutenant MOON, Commanding Officer, Barracks H, Waldorf,
Maryland, Maryland State Police. (Personally known to FERRALL
under GOLIATH)
Emergency Ambulance
-
Greenbelt Volunteer Fire Department.
(Can be cotained through SNODDY)
Above not to be contacted unless authorized by SAC or ASAC.
:
}
:
-6-
.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_37.jpeg ---
14 00000
1
1
t
1
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
of his absence, should be immediately notified and advice obtained as
to any emergency action which should be taken pending his arrival.
Likewise, the CAC or ASAC/PC should be notified immediately after
talking to the doctor in order that he might be apprised of the situation
and any instructions or treatment prescribed by the doctor. Regardless.
of any instructions given by the doctor, no action shall be taken to
remove the SUBJECT from the premises or to communicate with any hospital
or ambulance service without the prior authorization of the SAC or ASAC.
2. Should it become necessary to remove the SUBJECT to a hospital
or other location away from the premises, every possible precaution
should be taken to maintain close custody and control over him, and to
prevent disclosure of his true identity and status to unauthorized
persons.
.1.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS AND INFORMATION
Two men on duty on third floor who will keep SUBJECT under
constant observation twenty-four hours a day.
2. Four men in attendance whenever SUBJECT leaves cell while
confined to third floor.
3. Six men in attendance whenever SUBJECT is taken to interrogation
room on second floor, all to remain available in adjoining room for
removal signal from visitors.
4. Coveralls taken from. SUBJECT at 2200 hours and returned the
following morning at 0700 hours daily, leaving SUBJECT in shorts and
undershirt overnight.
5. Military appearance and prompt shift schedules maintained at
all times when in presence of SEJECT.
6. Careful room search, including clothes and bunk, to be conducted
every time SUBJECT leaves cell.
7. SUBJECT cust stand in West corner of cell facing wall whenever
anyone but Dr. BOHRER enters cell.
-4-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_38.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)
2. Windows in cell to remain blacked out and doors to other rooms
on 3rd floor to be closed and locked when SUBJECT leaves cell, in order
to prevent his becoming oriented to surroundings.
9. No unnecessary conversation shall be conducted with JEJECT or
among agents, nor shall any mention of last names be made within SUBJECT's
hearing.
10. SUBJECT is not to have access to newspapers and magazines, nor
permitted to hear radio or television, nor shall there be any discussion
of news events within his hearing. He may be provided selected reading.
material upon authorization of Headquarters personnel concerned with the
case.
11.
Recording devices to be promptly activated in order to pick up
any comments by SUBJECT or conversation between him and the doctor or
other operational personnel.
12. Any unusual or significant comments, movements or activities
of GJEJECT to be promptly brought to the attention of the SSA.
13. Telephone numbers of key Security and Operational personnel,
as well as photographs and physical description of SUBJECT to be maintained
in a secure place for ready reference by the SSA.
14. Should it become necessary to answer questions by the Police
or Pire Department regarding the site, personnel at the site, or with
specific reference to the SUBJECT, such inquiries should be handled
by the SSA with the senior Police or Fire Department official on the
scene. The SSA should converse in private with such official, and
identify himself by utilizing his DODD credential.
briefly, and only to the extent necessary, that the property is leased
He should explain
and that it is used occasionally for training purposes.
concerning the SUBJECT should be parried, if possible. However, if
All inquiries
necessary, it may be explained that the SUBJECT has a mental disorder
which sometimes requires special treatment. He should not be identified
under his alias or otherwise. The SSA should tactfully but firmly request
that his own identity, plus his DOD affiliation, be held in strict confidence,
especially with regard to the press. Inquiries by members of the press
or members of the civilian population should be answered by stating that
the site is rented by a private group who meet periodically for recreation.
-5-

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOP SECRET
INCLASSIFIED when blank-TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document-Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in-form is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Source
SR
Doc. No.
XAAZ-17241/1
Doc. Date
11 MAY 1964
Copy No.
# Repro 2
Number of Pages
Number of Attachments
28
REGISTRY
CIA Control No.
191722A.
Date Document Received
15 1978
JUN
Logged By
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on top of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi-
fied Top Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA. Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official duties relate to the matter. Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret material will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left.
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right-hand columns.
REFERRED TO
Office
RECEIVED
Signatura
DDP(TSCO)
3. Digg
BDC = 1 0 LC is flor 15 Jone
Scorf Bricke unity
RELEASED
Date
Time
Date
Time
1076
200/1500 B Livigg
The panete
PK/CI (key)
200/1300 B wrigg
Breckenridgeer Subrielson
2000/1500
1916
78
181973
JUIN
19 Jan-14 1915
20 UN
20108
JUN
1978
1978
TO
Signature
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form is detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in the appropriate spaces below and trans.
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
--
DOWNGRADED
DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OP.1)
TOP SECRET
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CIA)
TO
BY Sgnature)
DATE
OFFICE
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
AND DECLASSIFICATION
DATE
(40)
SEUR s I–
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_40.jpeg ---
'14-00000
I
OLC 69-8676
5 August 196)
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Briefing of bay Congientional Contacts on the
Yuriy Ivanovich Museuko Case
1. The Director having approved the proposal in my draft memo
of 17.June 1959 (copy attached) regarding the briefing of key congressional
contacta on the history and status of the Yurly Ivanovich Nosekno case, I
have briefed the following staff officers of Agency congressional Subcom
mittees along the lines proposed on the dates indicated:
Frank Slatinshek, Assistant Chief Counsel, House
Armed Services Committee 23 July 1752
--
William Woodruff, Assistant Chief Clerk, Sonate
Appropriations Committee 24 July 1969
Edward Braswell, Chief of Staff, Senate Armed
Services Committee
d-
24 July 1969
Robert Michaels, Staff Assistant, liouse Appropriations
Committee
--
29 July 1969
2. I suggested to each that they mention the matter to the respective
chairmen when and if they thought it appropriate. None of the staff officera
registered particular concera or curiosity about the case and I think it
doubtful that all of our chairmen have been informed. Neverthelesa, I
think we have adequately covered the matter and see no need to pursue it
further at this time.
Attachment:
Dutribution:
Original - CLC Subject Alle
-
DOP
1 - Chief, CI Staff
->
Chef, SB Division
1 - D.Security
: - CGC
1- CLC Caraco
SECRET
JOHN M. MACAY
Legislative Counsel
L

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
DRAFT:JMM
-
19 June 1969
SECRET EYES GILLY
1-9-12-1/2
SUBJECT: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts on the Nosenko. Case
The following paragraphs are proposed as guidance for briefing key
congressional contacts on the history and status of the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko
case. They are based primarily on material provided by SB Division, and have
been cleared by SB, CI Staff and the Office of Security. It is proposed that
the Chairmen and/or senior staff officers of each of the Agency Subcommittees
be briefed along the lines indicated.
1.
This case goes back sometime into history and you may recall
having heard of it several years ago. From time to time it has receivéd
press play, both when it first broke in early 1964 and occasionally since.
2. Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko, a Staff Officer of the Committee for
State Security (KGB) of the USSR, and son of a former Minister of Ship-
building in the USSR, defected to the Agency in Geneva, Switzerland, on
4 February 1964. He was then brought to the United States where he has
since been in the custody of the Agency undergoing extensive debrieüngs
by officers of the Agency and the FBI.
:
SECRET FYS CHLY
EVES

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_43.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
.
AS PUY
he would be targetted for "executive action" if the Soviets should discover
his whereabouts: With the passage of time, this latter factor is considered
to be sufficiently diminished to justify a phased normalization of Nosenko's
situation--this despite the fact that some points remain unresolved concerning
his bona fides.
5. The Agency, with the assistance of the FBI, is continuing to
1
look into those questionable aspects of the caso, while remaining alert to
the possibility of hostile interest. However, during the full period of his
stay in the United States Nosenko has cooperated with his interrogators and
with the other officers responsible for his safety and welfare, and our
current efforts are being directed toward his gradual adjustment to a normal,.
independent status. As a step in this direction, he is now living in his own¨‍
private apartment, subject to some protective surveillance.
6. This action is being taken in full recognition of the normal
problems of readjustment experienced by many defectors as well as the
fact that Nosenko is a potentially greater problem than most. He is an
individual whose actions during resettlement may not always be predictable
or wise from the point of view of his own security. We are hopeful that
Nosenko is sensible enough to realize that undue publicity caused by any rash
action on his part could lead to unpleasant, perhaps even dangerous consequences,
particularly for himself. We therefore believe it appropriate to take this
calculated risk in an attempt to steer him toward a reasonably normal life.
1st.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_44.jpeg ---
14-00000
]
i
SECT
NOSENKO
Question #1 - Conditions under which Nosenko was held while at..
Clinton? Locked in? Let outside for entertainment?
Prisoner? Treatment?
Answer:
During the period of 4 April 1964-13 August 1965, Nosenko
was held in strict confinement under the following conditions:
3.
b.
c.
d.
Confinement in single room except for
periods of interrogation.
Constantly under guard and subject to 24 hour
visual observation with regular room search.
Dress was coveralls and food was of sufficient
quantity but limited in variety.
No unnecessary conversation was permitted, radio
and television were not allowed, newspapers or
any information concerning current events were
forbidden and reading material was extremely
limited.
Question #2 - Conditions at ISOLATION.
Conditions at ISOLATION. Same as above.
Answer:
During the period of 13 August 1965 to 25 October 1967,
conditons cited above were basically maintained with the
following additons or changes:
a. From February 1966 to May 1967, Nosenko was
furnished no reading material.
b.
C.
d.
After May 1967, Nosenko was periodically given
a different volume of the Encyclopaedia.
Britannica to read.
From February 1966 to October 1967, Nosenko
was not permitted cigarettes.
Subject was permitted daily exercise in a small
confined area outside the building when weather
permitted.
SELL

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_45.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
F
SELE
Question #3 - Did McCone or Raborn have any information on this:
What?
-2.
"
Answer:..
Office of Security records contain only limited information
in regard to this question. The SE Division (then SR) was the
responsible office for the confinement of Nosenko until late
October 1967 when total responsibility was transferred to the
Office of Security by the DCI. It is presumed that the DCI was
at least generally aware of the confinement of Nosenko and the
conditions of confinement, but any definite statement must be
based on SE records.
Question #4
Answer:
-
Where is Nosenko working now?
Nosenko is currently employed at his personally owned
residence in North Carolina. He is engaged in research and
analytical work based on his previous knowledge of the KGB.
and other Soviet matters. He is in the Washington, D. C. arca
for several days approximately every six weeks for direct
interviews by the FBI and Office of Security personnel.
Question #5
Answer:
->>
Is he working for CIA?
Nosenko has been employed by the Agency on a full-time.
contractual basis since 1 March 1969. The original contract
has been periodically amended to reflect additional remuneration,
primarily to compensate for cost of living increases. In late
1971, Nosenko was compensated by mutual agreement for salary
not received during the 1 April 1964 to 1 March 1969. In addition,
on 12 July 1973 Nosenko signed an acknowledgement and release
of the United States Government and the Central Intelligence
Agency from any claims prior to that date.
Question #6
Answer:
-
What is his legal status?
Nosenko was naturalized as a United States citizen in
April 1974.
:
EYES Y
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_42.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
17
SHONEY BYRS Gar
GAY
3. Nosenko had been a KGB officer for approximately ten years
at the time of his defection. Nosenko has provided a large quantity of
counter-intelligence data and a limited amount of positive intelligence.
For example, one of his reports played a part in the negation of a major
hostile penetration in Great Britain. Whero appropriate, his information
has been shared with the FBI, other U.S. Government agencies and
forsign Haison services. This has resulted in extensive and continuing
investigative activity. In addition, Nosenko identified many hundreds of
Soviet Intelligence Officers and provided a considerable quantity of useful
information on the organization of the KGB, its operational doctrine and
‘its techniques and methods.
4. In debriefing him it became apparent that Nosenko, the privileged
and undisciplined son of a former ranking Minister of the Soviet Government,
was a particularly complex personality, one given to exaggeration of his own
importance. In this regard, certain aspects of his life history, when
weighed against other information already in our possession, raised some
doubts concerning his veracity. To permit extensive and prolonged debriefing,
arrangements were made to accommodate Nosenko under highly secure
conditions. These arrangements were dictated, during the initial phases
at least, by the additional need to provide Nosenko with continuing personal
protection since there was the distinct possibility that, as a KGB officer,
2. SECRET DES O

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
64382)
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Inspector General
SUBJECT
: The Nosenko Case
:
.
Attached please find a summary of a document written in
1967 to the General Counsel outlining the Nosenko case and
explaining to him actions which had been taken with regard to
Nosenko. As noted in the first paragraph, in October 1967
Nosenko took up residence in the Washington area and was
advised that, should he wish to leave the apartment for any
location whatsoever, he was free to so do. In other words,
from that date, Nosenko was essentially a totally free man.
That he chose not to flee in any way may be indicative of his
'attitude toward the manner in which he was handled prior to
October 1967.
While one can criticize the fact that Nosenko was kept
incommunicado for approximately three years, and therefore
presumably denied full civil rights, the attached document
does indicate, we believe, that the Agency was on the horns
of a dilemna in this regard. There were legitimate doubts
about. Nosenko's bona fides and concern that he was a Soviet
plant. There was no country to which he could be deported
save the Soviet Union, and Nosenko himself refused to return
there. Yet, in the United States, save when isolated from
society, he was considered to be a continuing threat to
national security.
Recognizing that only legal experts can judge defini-
tively the merits of the case, it seems to the writer that
the Agency had no choice but to hold Nosenko incommunicado
pending resolution of his bona fides. He was admitted to
the United States under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act, namely as a parolee
to the Agency. As a parolee, Nosenko de facto from the date
of his entry to the United States did not enjoy the full civil
rights of the normal citizen. He was a ward of the Agency, in
a sense, and the Agency was ultimately responsible for his
SECRET
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 018307
:
=

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
:
In early or mid-1967, the Agency General Counsel was
provided a summary of the Nosenko case. The memorandum
sought an advisory opinion from the General Counsel on the
Agency's legal basis for its handling of Nosenko through
that date and on the legal aspects on the eventual disposi-
tion of Nosenko. Shortly subsequent to this memorandum to
the General Counsel, Nosenko took up residence in October 1967
in an apartment in the Washington area and was reminded that
should he wish, he could travel freely anywhere at anytime.
He gradually created a new life for himself in the United
States and has indicated on several occasions that he holds
no ill feeling about his handling by the Agency at anytime.
Background
Nosenko voluntarily established contact with CIA repre-
sentatives in Geneva in 1962. He identified himself as a
staff officer of the KGB's internal security directorate and
offered to sell counterintelligence information. This offer
was accepted and he was recruited as an agent in place and
SECRET
1
!
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
To
conduct. There were at the time very legitimate reasons to
believe that full and total release of Nosenko would be an
abrogation by the Agency of its legal responsibility.
gainsay that decision in retrospect is, we believe, an error.
In sum, the act of defection places the defector at the mercy
of the laws of the country to which he defects.
obligation of the accepting country to see to it that the
It is the
laws are followed. In the Nosenko case, it seems to us that
the Agency acted in a fully responsible manner to ensure that
its responsibility for the defector was met. While it was.
unfortunate that it took so long to resolve the matter, we
can find no fault with the fact that the Agency met its
responsibility to both the United States and to Nosenko
himself.
Attachment: A/S
SECRET
1
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_49.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
SECRET
:
debriefed on counterintelligence matters during five meetings
in Geneva. He then returned to the USSR. He came to Geneva
again in January 1964 as the security officer for the Soviet
disarmament delegation. After a number of meetings with his
CIA handlers he defected on 4 February 1964 and was secretly
taken to Frankfurt, Germany, crossing the Swiss-German border
on the night of 4/5 February with alias U.S. Army identity
documents. In Geneva and again upon arrival in Frankfurt,
Nosenko wrote out an asylum request, requesting political
asylum from the U.S. Government.
Because serious doubts about Nosenko's bona fides had
arisen on the basis of the information he had provided both
in 1962 and in the meetings in Geneva in 1964, it was orig-
inally planned to do a detailed bona fides debriefing and
assessment in Germany before making any decision about moving
Nosenko to the United States. However, unprecedented action
by the Soviet. Government in respect to the defection of one
of its citizens forced a change of plans. On 9 February,
unidentified Soviet sources in Geneva leaked the news to the
press that Nosenko, described as an "expert attached to the
Soviet Delegation to the Disarmament Conference" had dis-
appeared, and that it was presumed that he had defected.
2
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_50.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
:
Because of mounting pressure from the press, which included
much speculation that Nosenko was a high level scientist or
disarmament expert, it was decided that the State Department
would make a brief announcement acknowledging Nosenko's
request for asylum in the U.S. and identifying him as a
member of the KGB. This was done on 10 February. On 11 Feb-
ruary, the Soviet Government delivered a note to the American
Embassy in Moscow asking how Nosenko left Switzerland and
requesting an immediate interview with him and his release.
On 12 February, Soviet Ambassador to the Disarmament Confer-
ence TSARAPKIN held a press conference in Geneva in which he
accused the Swiss Government of failure to cooperate in
locating Nosenko. Although the Swiss categorically rejected
these charges, the American Ambassador to Switzerland recom-
mended that Swiss authorities be allowed to interview Nosenko
to convince themselves that Nosenko had left Switzerland of
his own free will.
On 12 February 1964, on the instructions of the Director,
He travelled by
Nosenko was brought to the United States.
commercial air, again using alias U.S. Army identification,¨
and was admitted to the country at New York City (in true
name) on parole under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
3
SECRET
..

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
TOP SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED when blank-TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document--Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in form is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
Source
Doc. No.
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Doc. Date
T
Copy No.
SR/CI/K
XAAZ-17241/2
19 MAY 1964
Repro 2
Number of Pages 22
Number of Attachments
REGISTRY
CIA Control No.
TS# 191722B
Date Document Received
JUN
151070
Logged By
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on top of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi
hed Top Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official Quties relate to the matier. Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret material will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left.
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right hand columns.
REFERRED TO
Office
RECEIVED
Signature
DORTSCO) B. Trigg
DDP(TSCO)
Norder 15 Jone
Scott Brickenridge
RELEASED
Date
Time
Dato
Time
1599
78
Signature
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
ODO/ESCO B
142/15
part
B. Liga
UN
1978
19 JUN
1976
theponent 19 am to 197jane 75
$1/00/0
AC/1 (Nicky)
DDOMSCO B. Lo
DCI/000.
1931
Swiġġ
20140700
23 JUN
1578
1978
Breckinridge or Gabrielson
DDO/SCO
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form is detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in the appropriate spaces below and trans.
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
DOWNGRADED
TO
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
(OP 1)
TOP SECRET
DATE
11
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CIA)
TO
BY (Signature)
OFFICE
GROUP ]
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
ARD DECLASSIFICATION
DATE
(40)
SECRwt
T

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_52.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
}
SECRET
he was
made available to representatives of the FBI for debriefing
on matters affecting their responsibilities. Although allowed
out for evening and week-end excursions, Nosenko was at all
times accompanied by O/S personnel. In addition, he took a
two-week vacation to Hawaii, again accompanied by case offi-
cers and security guards. Evidence continued to mount that
a KGB plant, and at the same time it became obvious
that it would be impossible to proceed_further to resolve
the many suspicious points and contradictions that had arisen
without changing the conditions in which he was being held.
Nosenko was growing increasingly uncooperative, especially
when sensitive areas were touched upon, and constantly pressed
for the legalization of his status in the U.S. and the issuance
of an alien registration card. At the same time, Nosenko's
heavy drinking and other unruly personal habits were causing
increasing difficulties to the security personnel charged with
keeping him under control and out of trouble at all times in
accordance with Agency local responsibility. It was clear
that it was only a matter of time before he created a public.
scandal. More importantly, he was in a position to communi-
cate with the KGB since physical control could not be absolute.
On 4 April 1964, Nosenko voluntarily underwent a polygraph
examination. The results of this examination indicated deception
1
S
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_54.jpeg ---
Ida L
14-0000
j
SECRET
investigations.
We concluded that it had been established
beyond reasonable doubt that Nosenko was a KGB agent who.
established contact with CIA, subsequently defected on KGB
instructions, and that he came to the United States on a
deception mission. The implications of this mission had a
grave and direct bearing on U.S. national security. Although
our findings were supported by the results of two polygraph
examinations, the nature of the evidence was inadmissable in
a court of law. In any case, it is clear that Nosenko had'
not been in a position to perform any overt act of transgres-
sion of U.S. espionage laws since 4 April 1964 when he was.
placed in a restricted area and deprived of any conceivable
means of communication with the KGB.
Nosenko did not admit that he defected on KGB orders
or that he came to the U.S. on a KGE mission. He has admitted,
however, that he made numerous lies about his personal history
and about the details of his KGB service to U.S. officials,
both before and after arriving in the United States.
Coordination with Other U.S. Government Agencies
USIB Members. In accordance with the DDCI's ruling
relating to a defector who has been a member of a hostile
intelligence service, Nosenko's status and handling was dis-
cussed at an executive session of USIB and decided on an
7
SECRET
I
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_51.jpeg ---
-14-00000
SECRET
At
On 13 February, representatives of the Swiss and Soviet
Embassies in Washington advised the State Department that
they desired interviews with Nosenko. On 14 February, in
Moscow, Soviet Foreign Minister GROMYKO called in Ambassador
KOHLER and protested "impermissable activities" on the part
of the U.S. in Nosenko's case. Soviet press spokesmen took
an even harder line to Western correspondents, and accused
the U.S. of kidnapping Nosenko. On the afternoon of 14 Sep-
tember, at two separate interviews, he spoke first to Swiss
Embassy and then to Soviet Embassy representatives.
these interviews, which were also attended by State Department
and INS officials, Nosenko confirmed that he left Switzerland
of his own free will to seek asylum in the U.S. In addition,
he replied to questions of the Soviet Embassy representative
to the effect that he was renouncing his Soviet citizenship.
On the evening of 14 February, the U.S. State Department made.
a brief formal reply to the Soviet protest, then issued a
brief statement to the press noting that the interviews had
been held and that Nosenko had confirmed his desire to remain
in this country.
From the time of his arrival to 4 April 1964, Nosenko
was housed in the Washington area. During this period, reg-
ular systematic debriefing was commenced, and Nosenko was
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_53.jpeg ---
14-00000
730
SECRET
:
i
on a number of critical points indicating that he was sent
by the KGB to perform one or more missions which also involved
his penetration of the Agency and its operations. It was
decided, therefore, that the physical circumstances of Nosenko's
stay in this country would have to be drastically changed if
the Agency were to carry out its counterintelligence responsi
bilities and adhere to the terms of the parole agreement.
a result, he was moved to quarters where his movements could
be more easily controlled, and his outing privileges were
suspended pending resolution of bona fides.
As
It is worth noting that had we not taken the above action
but accepted Nosenko at face value, it is quite possible that
would have proceeded with a series of operational actions
on the basis of his information. The results of some of these
actions could have been very embarrassing to the U.S. Government
politically and damaging to U.S. national security. For exam¯”
ple, his chief operational proposal at the time, and one that
he was most insistent that we should proceed with immediately,
involved the compromise of a very senior Soviet official.
Sona Fides
Beginning in April 1964, hundreds of hours were devoted
te interrogations of Nosenko (in which he willingly cooperated)
and a great deal of time was spent on exhaustive collateral
6
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_56.jpeg ---
+
14-00000
SECRET
The Secretary of State, Ambassador Thompson, and other
senior officials in the Department of State were informed of
our reservations about Nosenko's bona fides and our fears that
he might be a dispatched KGB agent. In discussions about the
possibility of Nosenko's eventual deportation, the Secretary
of State expressed serious concern about the adverse reaction
that such a move might have on other potential defectors.
The Director of Security, State Department, was informed
of the bona fides problem at an early date. We have worked
closely with this office since then on the problem of eval-
uating the significance of Nosenko's information as it affects
the security interests of the State Department.
Because so much of Nosenko's information affected U.S.
internal security matters for which the FBI bears primary
responsibility, and because the possibility that Nosenko was
a KC2 plant had a direct bearing on the validity of certain
FBI operations, the FBI was kept fully informed on our views
about Nosenko's bona fides and our progress in interrogating
and investigating him from the moment of his defection. The
FBI liaison officer was told of our reservations on Nosenko's
bona fides as early as 5 February 1964. The Director of the
FBI and his deputy for Internal Security, William Sullivan,
were kept completely up to date, and we coordinated all major
:
1
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!
:
SECRET
ad hoc basis. Nosenko defected on 4 February 1964, and the
Secretary of State, the Attorney General, the Special Assis-
tant to the President on National Security Affairs, McGeorge
Bundy, General Carroll, Director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency and the FBI were all notified immediately.
It was
On 5 Febru-
ary 1964, General Carter reported the defection to an executive
session of USIB and followed this up with formal statements to
USIB members on 11 and 19 February 1964, which stated that
Nosenko's bona fides had not yet been established.
agreed that no DS number would be issued to Nosenko, and that
he would be handled on a special basis by this Agency. In
fact, normal USIB interest in Nosenko as a defector dropped
off drastically as it became quickly apparent that he had no.
positive intelligence interest of value to any part of the
community.
The President was informed of the full extent of our
suspicions about Nosenko's bona fides by the then Director,
Mr. Mccone, on 11 February 1964. Nr. Patrick Coyne, Executive
Secretary of the PFIAB, was given a similar briefing by
Mr. Helms on 19 February 1964.
Generals Carroll and Fitch of DIA were also subsequently
informed of the problems about Nosenko's bona fides.
8
SECRET
;

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_57.jpeg ---
'
j
14-00000
SECRET
aspects of our handling Nosenko with them.
After a long
meeting with Sullivan and other FBI representatives to review
Nosenko's case on 1 April 1964, the FBI interposed no objec-
tions to our proposal to restrict Nosenko's movements and
commence hostile interrogation. Subsequently, the FBI for
mally agreed with our findings on Nosenko, at least to the
extent that "On considering carefully the results of your
interrogations of Yuriy Nosenko and your analysis of his
statements and activities, it does appear he is not what he
purports to be. While this Bureau is not in a position to
draw any conclusion in this case, we do recognize it is
possible that Nosenko could be a Soviet plant or agent pro-
vocateur.
The then Acting Attorney General Mr. Nicholas Katzenbach
(and several members of his staff) were apprised of our res-
ervations about Nosenko on 2 April 1964 and an opinion was
sought from him both as to interpretation of the exclusion
and parole agreement, and as to how we should proceed in the
event that it proved necessary to deport Nosenko from this
country.
Efforts to Keep the KGB from Learning of Our Awareness of
Nosenko's True Status
From the time we learned that Nosenko had been sent to
this country on a KGB mission it was obvious that if we were
10
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_58.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
☐
to have the time to analyze and resolve this case, and to
plan and execute appropriate countermeasures, it was essential
that we attempt to keep the KGB from learning of our awareness
of Nosenko's true status. Consequently, detailed knowledge
of the depth and scope of our suspicions about Nosenko, and
the implications thereof, was restricted to a very few people
in the Agency and the intelligence community.
Nonetheless,
we did advise key policy echelons and principals in the intel-
ligence community, even though this carried the inevitable
risk of leakage.
Soviet Inspired Inquiries
In 1966 there were several indications that the Soviets
- were making a serious effort to find out what happened to
Nosenko and to force him to the surface. The most blatant
and unusual of these was the approach by a Soviet journalist,
Yuriy KOROLEV (a known KGB agent), to the French magazine
Paris Match with an offer to provide photographs and materials
for an exclusive story of Nosenko and his family. According
to Korolev, Nosenko's wife was considering an approach to an
international juridicial organization in an effort to obtain
compensation from Nosenko for damages caused by his abandon-
ment of her and her children. In responding to this approach
we quoted a statement, purporting to be from Nosenko himself,
11
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
this implied, it was apparent that great practical problems
stood in the way of his deportation to either the USSR or a
third country.
USSR: Nosenko has categorically stated on numerous
occasions that he will never contemplate return to the USSR,
and, although we suspect that he might secretly welcome such
a move, we would expect him to act out his part to the end
with loud protests that he was being shipped to his death,
etc. When the possibility of expulsion was discussed with
Department of State officials in 1964, both the Secretary of
State and Ambassador Thompson expressed their concern for
the adverse effect this might have on other potential defec-
tors. Forcible repatriation of political refugees is against
long established U.S. policy, and would be certain to arouse
violent reaction from ethnic minority groups in the United
States. Under these circumstances an alleged "confession"
by Nosenko would have come under very close scrutiny, and
might have backfired very badly. Another point that had to
be considered was the possibility that the Soviets, again
playing their part, might have refused to accept Nosenko on
the grounds that he has renounced his Soviet citizenship.
Third Country: Although we believed it likely that
Nosenko would accede to deportation to a third country,
I
?
14
SECRET
i
7

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
there is certainly no country in the free world on which we
could conceivably have unloaded Nosenko without first inform-
ing them of his true status. Even if we considered this a
desirable objective, it seemed certain that the Department
of State would veto such a piece of intergovernmental duplic-
ity on the basis of the political risks involved.
15
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_59.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-'
:
SECRET
to the effect that Nosenko considers this approach to repre-
sent blatant and cruel manipulation of his family by the KGB
and that he will not lend himself to the scheme by agreeing
to an interview or in any other way.
Nosenko's Status
To recapitulate, Nosenko entered the United States on
12 February 1964 on parole to the Agency under the provisions
of Section 212 (d) (5) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act. Parole responsibility is delegated to the Agency by
the Attorney General under the terms of an agreement executed
by the Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955,
which states:
"After parole of such aliens, the Central Intel-
ligence Agency will assume responsibility for
care, supervison and control of a kind and
degree it believes consistent with the internal
security needs of the United States during con-
tinuance of their parole status."
In accordance with our understanding of this agreement, and
because we had reason to believe that Nosenko was a conscious
and willing agent of a hostile intelligence service, we.
ensured that he was under our direct observation and control
at all times from the moment of his arrival in the United
12
SECRET
:
:
$

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOP SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED when blank—TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document-Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in form is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
Source
REGISTRY
CIA Control No.
C/SR
Doc. No. CSCI-3/781,491
Doc. Date 19 May 1964
Copy No.
# Repro 2.
TS# 191722C_
Date Document Received
15 JUN
Logged By
1970
B
TOP
SECK
R
E
Number of Pages
Number of Attachments
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on the of and attached to each Top Secret document received by the Central Intelligence Agency or classi-
fied Top Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed, or transmitted outside
of CIA. Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control personnel and those individuals whose official duties relate to the matter. Top
Secret Control Officers who receive and/or release the attached Top Secret material will sign this form and indicate period of custody in the left-
hand columns provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in the right-hand columns.
REFERRED TO
-
Office
RECEIVED
DOPTSCO B. Bigg
DCI/01
1/04/0
-Messtec
cots Buckinridge
RELEASED
Date
Time
Dato
Time
IN
1970
Signature
SEEN BY
Office/Div.
Date
T
Dig/15000B Lavigg
B.
1515
Slipestin
13/107
JUN
078
19 UN
10/00/0p 19/978 197
Ac/1(m(coy)
200/1500 B. Lwigg
20 UN
20
JUN
1970
078
DCI/OLE
Breckinridge us
For Gabrielsen
200/7500
-
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form as detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in the appropriate spaces below and trans-
mitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
TO
By (Signature)
OFFICE
FORM
6-64
DOWNGRADED
DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
26 use previouS EDITIONS.
(OP-1)
TOP SECRET
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CIA)
TO
BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
GROUP 1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
AND DECLASSIFICATION
DATE
(40)

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_60.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
States. From 12 February to 4 April 1964
it was possible to
enjoy a certain
keep Nosenko at a location where he could
amount of movement and of contact with the outside world.
After 4 April 1964, for reasons explained above, it was
necessary to keep him incommunicado at a location which is
known to no one outside of the Agency (and to very few within
it). Authorization for Nosenko to remain in this country
under the Special Agreement Procedures was periodically
extended by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Although his freedom of movement had been severely
restricted, Nosenko was not maltreated and he made no com-
plaint about his treatment. On the contrary, we had several
written statements from him in which he stated that our.
handling of him was justified and even beneficial.
Disposal
From the time that Nosenko was brought to this country
we thought about the possibility of his eventual deportation
as a contingency measure. In early 1964, we thought that it
might be possible to mitigate the political and propaganda
drawbacks of a forced deportation by announcing that Nosenko
has confessed his true KGB role. With the passage of time,
however, and in view of our much firmer conclusions about his
real role and mission and our clearer understanding of what
13
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_63.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
2
i
1
SECRET
Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO
Fold
unfiive
Noscato.
NOSENKO is a Soviet intelligence officer who defected
He was subsequently brought to the
in Switzerland in 1964.
U.S., and after a short period of relative freedom, he was
Commencing in
confined under strict and relatively austere conditions
for a period of approximately three years.
1967, he was given increasing amounts of freedom until he
was allowed total freedom in 1969. He subsequently married
a U.S. citizen, settled in the Southeastern United States
He is presently under
⚫itizen in 1974.
and became a U.S.
contract to the Agency, providing consultative services
and information on subjects germanė to his background.
NOSENKO was confined when as a result of his debriefing
substantive questions were raised concerning his bona fides,
NOSENKO's debriefing
and his general behavior raised further concern about his
emotional health and general safety.
The advice of the
and confinement were ended when it was concluded that he
✓ his confine-
was not a threat to national security.
infing.
Justice Department was obtained at the time of he
ment, and the FBI participated in his subsequent debri
NOSENKO's initial entry into the U.S. was coordinated wit..
the Department of State, and they were periodically advised
of his status during his confinement up to the time of his
final settlement.
.h
The strict conditions of NOSENKO's confinement were
intended to convey to him the seriousness of his position
as a suspected disinformation agent and to make clear to him that
his free settlement in the U.S. was precluded as long as
It was understood, however,
this issue was unresolved.
that at any time he could have elected to end his confine-
OS files do not document
ment and return to the Soviet Union.
,
that this latter condition was explicitly conveyed to
NOSENKO, however, it is the recollection of senior staff
officers (ADD/O and D/OS) that such was the case, and further
that it was a condition routinely applied to other defectors.
whose bona fides were in doubt.
☐
SECRET
15.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_64.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel
.SUBJECT
Nosenko
17
13: 1275
1975-01
:
·
Attached is a report from the Office of Security concerning the aware.
ness of other Federal authorities (USIB, State, FBI, and I&NS). We have
been advised by ADD/O that Nosenko at all times was advised that he could
elect to leave the U. S.., but that he could not be ensured of immediate
liberty if he elected to stay; in a sense, we are told, he elected to stay under
the conditions then prevailing. We do not yet have documentation on this
latter point, other than as shown in the attachment.
W
S. D. Breckinridge
Attachment: a/s
013. 46
2
SIRDET
!
:
i
:
i

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_69.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
1
SEGRET
EYES ONLY
31 DEC 1974
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
: Deputy Director for Administration
VIA
SUBJECT .
:
PARAGON
NOSENKO
AELADLE
CELOTEX I
CELOTEX II
MOCKINGBIRD
1. Attached is a report concerning Subject topics
which was requested by Mr. Scott Breckenridge of your office.
As you will note, the report is in a question and answer
format with attachments.
2. This Office is still gathering material in regard
to the SIESTA Project and REDFACE I. In addition, other
files are being culled to provide more details, if they exist,
on the above mentioned projects.
S
/
Sidney D Stembridge
Acting Director of Security
Atts
Distribution:
Original
-
Adse
1 - DDA
EYES ONLY
S
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 010249
:
!
☐
2

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_65.jpeg ---
14-00000
CENTRAL
AGENCR
AGENCY
.
7
"TOR SECRET
EYES ONLY
SPET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 23. D. C.
iddited
already
OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
12. February 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: United States Intelligence Board Hembers.
SUBJECT:"
Yuri Ivanovich HOSENKO
•
1. This memorandum refers to the State Department
release of 10 February on subject case and provides addi-
tional background as well as information on his current
status...
23 As a KGB staff officer, NOSENXO is regularly
assigned to the Counterintelligence Directorate of tho
KGB in Moscow but was included in the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover arrange-
sent which permitted his to carry out intelligence and
security functions in Gonova on behalf of the XG3.
Various
3 JURY 2150 recone Ossions of the
⠀ Disarmament Conference hold in Genova in 1962. During the
course of these sessions, NOSENKO sought contact with
officials of the U. S. Governmont, informed these officials
that he was affiliated with the Soviet State Security ap-
paratus and volunteered to aid the U. S. Government in t
detecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the
U. S. Government. During the course of his contact with.
U. S. authorities, NOSENKG stated that his cooperation with
the U, S. Government originated with his distists and batrad
for the Soviet regime in general, with his desire to obtain
revenge for the unjust death of his father, a senior official
in the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general
adaization of the Americans with whom he had como in con-
tact within the Soviet Unica.
•
4. In late January 1964, ROSENKO arrived in Geneva,
again masquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation
to the Disarmament Conference. Subject secretly notified
his CL contacts in the United States concerning bis pres-
once in Geanya and arranged to meet with these contacts,
During a series of meetings 305ENKO provided informatica
including documents concerning Soviet State Security i-
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detailed account
E2 IMPDET
TORT SECRET
☑T SECRET CL BY 063344
FIES DALY
HR 10-23
.
9 January 1975
.
I

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_66.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
EVES
of the XG3 operation against U. S. Professor Sarghoora
which NOSENKO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEMICHASTNIY, the Chairman of the Committee
for State Security (KGB).
-
5. During these most recent meetings NOSENKO announced.
his desire to leave the USSR permanently and seek his futura
in the Most. He claimed his new work in the XG3 (First
Deputy Chief of that départment charged with the surveillance.
and recruitment of American visitors to the USSR) was ax-
panding and that be would not be able to visit the Most
with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a request for
political asylum in the United States. He was taken to
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing interro-
gation. Plans are now being made to remove his to the U. S.
6 It should be noted that CIA contact with Subject
has not been extensive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides.
It should also be noted that NOSENKO's Juties were not con-
cerned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conference,
and he thared to be able to shed auch, if
pany, light on that area of our interest.
7. The possibility that NOSENKO's defection was da-
signed to wreck the conference was most carefully considered.
The decision to accept his was taken on the conviction that
the Soviets would not have chosen such a vulnerable agent
(staff officer of the KGB) for this kind of move.
Marshall S. Carter
Lloutenant Canoral, USA
Deputy Director
SCOPET
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
TAB
f
DEFECTORS
-
NOS
NOSENKO
TITLE
Report on: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko, Soviet
Attachments:
DATE
2 Apr 64
1. Mero for Record from David E. Murphy, Subject:
Discussion with Deputy Attorney General on
Nosenko Case
2 Apr 64
2. Memo for Director of Security from Lawrence R.
Houston, Subject: Parole Status of Defectors
3. Memo, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
Letter for Mr. Richard Helms from J. Walter
Yeagley, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko
Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrell from Richard
Helms, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
(Forms 1-125 and background data attached)
Letter for Mr. Louis Wienckowski from Frank E.
Bartos, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nossenko
3 Apr 64
Jan 75
20 Oct 69
9 Oct. 69
24 July 69
Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrell from Victor R.
White, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO
18 Jul 69
Routing Sheet from Chief, SR Division to
DD/OS
13 Feb 64
Memo for Mr. McGeorge Bundy from Thomas H. Karamessines,11 Feb 64
Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko
Memo for US Intelligence Board Members from Marshall 12 Feb 64
S. Carter, Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko
Newspaper clipping: Nosenko's Account Disputes
Charge by Soviet
Newspaper clipping: U.S. Lets Swiss and Red Envoys
talk to Defector
15 Feb 64
4. Mazo for Acting Chief. Support Branch from Jack
M. Bauman
12 May 64
5. Meno for Special Agent in Charge District Field
Office from Victor R. White, Subject: LESNIK, George
M. (Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody of)
10 Jul 64

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_67.jpeg ---
14-00000
>
=
EISTRY
31 December 1974
MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel
SUBJECT
: Office of Security reports on PARAGON,
NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX I and II
and MOCKINGBIRD
1.
Forwarded herewith is a 31 December 1974 memorandum
from the Acting Director of Security on subject activities. The
material represents responses to questions posed by your office.
Obviously, the next phase of the investigation will require more
detailed reviews of each activity.
2. Questions that occur to us in reading the attached, are:
PARAGON
We should spell out what is meant by the
statement that the FBI "deferred further coverage.
to the Office of Security," how it was expressed and
what form it took.
The taping of two conversations does not seem
to constitute "electronic surveillance" in the usual
sense. It certainly is not trespatory surveillance.
A little more detail on the equipment will be wanted.
NOSENKO
We will go to the DDO for any record of DCI
knowledge, and report such information as we get.
AELADLE
DDC's
We will want to verify DDCI's approval of entry.
Z
93+0
1
I

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_68.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGRET
}
CELOTEX I
We will want more detail on the actual
surveillance, including possible higher approval.
This is responsive to the DCI's request for
newspaper articles that led to the surveillance.
CELOTEX II
+
Questions similar to CELOTEX I.
We may want actual copies of newspaper-
stories for display, in addition to memos, should
DCI wish to use it.
MOCKINGBIRD
No recorded (in CIA) formal approval by
Attorney General. It may be that Justice will
have a copy.
Does this raise a question of surveillance
of congressmen if one is contacted by someone.
under surveillance?
3. Security experts to have reports on Mahêu, SIESTA,
REDFACE, surveillance trucks, and Israeli COMINT by COB
Thursday.
Attachments a/s
..
S. D. Breckinridge
->>>
->>>
EYES CLILY
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_70.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
REQUEST
1, Yurly Ivanovich Hosenko, request the Government of
the United States of America to grant me political asylum
This decision has been
in the United States of America.
5214
taken by me as the result of considering this question
over the course of several years without any pressure on
the part of anyone whosoever. I absolutely do not believe
in the truth of the Socialist system. working in tlie KGB
and knowing more than the ordinary Soviet Citizen about
the internal situation, the mood of the people and the
policies of the Soviet Government, I became convinced that
in the USSR there is not and never will bo truth and real
freedom as long as the country is governed by the Communist
Party Travelling on official trips abroad to the countries
of the est, I was able correctly to understand and become
aware of the oxistence of a real and actual free world.
The events in Hungary and East Berlin and the split of the
·Communist movement are for ne vivid examples and confiran-
tion of the correctness of my own decision to break forevor
with the Soviet Union. I want to assure the Covernment of
the United States of America that I will devote all ny
strength and knowledge to the Government and people of the
United States of America.
=
1.8. To
4 February 1964
/s/ Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenio

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_71.jpeg ---
14-00000
ataabelly
Medic baboy Gay Ma
Cigni baaz Sagana.
-wwwmediata apop
ciqpambanat extern speed
Il añcarpe 1. le alt bezgre -
Pitbasas, CPCB a Deal
toetus pain pagelib velenomili sucebaj o Skyper-
50.00
Dacp tác #¢ ¥jzzi talje u poludiger
ji
XAV
icip
thisisted
- kumsa pipeded embepaald casu
my Sheen gepoline
bouquith Garage
xrupabuste liitteen
a constant sygicallastus pacises a godandu
po po take beca
Restprices
."
rep patient
why bydlegation a monturilly murule
J.
A
20:18
P SHOPOLI
glucane alecours a day
here equatio preprostive tear spalierzes
Celestenen Cousom.
Cory slip
sap
Spee
fecha ely at Sakitoke Ton his evently u tapety
Perque Went ther
:
7

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_73.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
:
i
i
i
: this
1969.
(SEAL)
1
IN WITNESS WHEREOF. I have hereunto set my hand and seat
2.1
day of
More
1969.
/s/ IDEN 1
(L.S.)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 2/4 day of art.
/sl IDEN 7
Notary Public
My commission expires Scptember 24, 1963
i
t
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_72.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐
☑
Y
1
UNDERTAKING REGAPDING OBLIGATIONS AND SECRECY
16
1
$
In consideration of arrangements being made by the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY for my future employment and welfare, Ifreely
acknowledge that I have nó outstanding claims of any nature against the
1 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. I further acknowledge that there
are no commitments to me on the part of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY which remain unsatisfied arising out of any of my prior
associations with the Agency. I fully understand that the current arrange-
ments between myself and the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY are
intended to completely encompass all obligationg
dr
any nature whatsoever
made to me by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
1
Täcknowledge my desire to serve the interests of the United States
by fulfilling the obligations which I have accepted in the current
arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. I assert
under oath, as indicated by my signature below, that I have completely,
totally and permanently severed any and all relationships with any other
government, its agencies, organs or functionaries including the Communist
Party; that I will not in the future advocate, teach, or become a member
of or become affiliated with any organization which advocates or teaches
opposition to all organized government; that I will not in the future become
a member of or become affiliated with the Communist Party or any other
totalitarian party; and that I do not now nor will I in the future advocate
the economic, international, and governmental doctrines of world >>
communism.
I understand fully the need for secrecy regarding my past,
present and future relationships with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY and I agree to keep forever secret these relationships and
my arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY including
all information which I may obtain by reason of any associations with
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, with full knowledge that
violation of such secrecy may subject me to criminal prosecution under
the espionage laws (18 U.S. C. 793, 794) and other applicable laws and
regulations. I understand that this is a solemn and permanent undertaking
which I must observe even after termination of any contracts or other
arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. In addition,
I understand that I may not discuss with or disclose to any person not
authorized to hear it any information concerning the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, its activities, or intelligence material under
the control of the Agency. I understand that the burden is upon me to
ascertain from the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY whether or not
information is classified and if so, who is authorized to receive it.
I take the obligations set forth above freely, without any mental
reservations or purpose of evasion.
"
:
;
:
1
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_74.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
IDEN 1
:
i
Dear
IDEN 1
The UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, as represented by the
: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, hereby contracts with you under
the following terms and conditions:
1. STATUS. Your legal status under this contract is that of an
independent contractor or consultant.
You are not considered an
employee of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this
You will be required to hold yourself available at all times
contract.
con
to fulfili requests made of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
or to respond to tasks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY. You will refrain from engaging in other gainful employment
or occupation until approval has been received from the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. Instructions furnished to you pursuant to
this contract and within the terms hereof shall be as binding upon you..
as if included in the written terms hereof,
2
COMMUNICATION In all relationships with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, tasks and relevant
instructions from an individual hereinafter referred to as the
"Authorized Government Representative." He will be fully authorized
to discuss matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this
i
contract including, but not limited to, cover arrangements, place of
assignment, conditions of work or any other matters relating to your
relationship with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
**
3. COVER AND SECURITY.
1
In the performance of your
responsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangements will be made
regarding cover and general security conditions,
You may be required
:
:
_

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_75.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover
arrangements but it is to be expressly understood that such documenta
are solely for the purpose of cover and security and confer no additional
legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and obligations with
respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY derive solely from
this agreement. In connection with cover and security you will be
provided from time to time specific instructions by the Authorized
Government Representative and you will be required to adhere precisely
to such instructions.
i- .
J
4. COMPENSATION. You will be compensated by the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY at the rate of Sixteen Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($16,500.00) per year. Payment of this compensation shall be
for N
monthly in accordance with arrangements acceptable to the Authorized
Government Representative. This sum is subject to Federal income
taxes and to such income tax laws as are applicable to your place of
residence. Additionally, this compensation is subject to FICA taxes.
The current rates and method of payment will be in accordance with
applicable laws and the security instructions issued by the Authorized
Government Representative. To assist you in establishing yourself, the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will assist you in procuring an
automobile and necessary household furnishings, providing funds therefor,
up to a maximum of Eight Thousand Dollars ($8,000.00). Payment of all
taxes and preparation of necessary tax returns are your personal
obligation and responsibility but in accord with appropriate security
instructions which will be furnished by the Authorized Government
Representative.
-2-
;
t
....

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_76.jpeg ---
14-00000
?
:
"
§.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE. In the interests of security, you will
be required to live in such State, area, and house or apartment as is
specifically approved by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY after
mutual discussion and due consideration of all circumstances.
All of
the expenses of such leased house or apartment will be borne by you and
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will not be obligated to pay any
such expenses.
6. ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
course of fulfilling your responsibilities under this agreement, monetary
allowances would be payable under general UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary
allowances in substantial accordance with those laws and regulations.
If, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are
authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expenses will
be made by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial
accordance with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
regulations.
7. HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL CARE. The CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will provide you with reasonable insurance
covering medical care and hospitalization equivalent to that which could
be obtained through standard insurance policies; or, the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY may provide directly such medical care and
hospitalization.
8. SECRECY OBLIGATION.
You will be required to keep forever
secret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason
hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledge that violation of such
-3-
42441

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_77.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
"
i
secrecy may subj. et
Qiminal prosecution under the egpionage laws.
as amended, and other applicable laws and regulations. Your relationship
with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and this contract must be
kept secret and you may not discuss any aspect of this relationship and
contract with any person other than the Authorized Government
Representative or such other person as he may specifically approve.
No promises or
9.
UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS,
commitments pertaining to rights, privileges, or benefits other than those
expressly stipulated in writing in this agreement or any amendment thereto.
shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
10. TERM.
This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1969
and shall be for a term of one (1) year. At the end of that period this
contract shall be deemed to be renewed for another year unless notice of
termination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance of the
elapse of one (1) year. Thereafter the contract will be renewed automatically
on similar terms and conditions. This contract may be terminated at any
time by either party upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice. Upon
termination of this contract or renewals thereof, including amendments,
if any, the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake to assist
you in obtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensation
to assure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of
living. This undertaking is contingent upon your fulfilling the terms of
this contract and the continuing compliance with the secrecy obligations
17152
i
i
;
I
-4-
:
1
E

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_78.jpeg ---
1400000
1
i
imposed on you by paragraph 8 of this contract and the provisions of
any secrecy agreement which you have signed with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
Date:
ACCEPTED:
2.1. April 1919
WITNESS:
:
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
As Represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
By:
Contracting Officer
/s/ IDEN 1
Date:
21 april 1969
Date:
/s/ IDEN 7
7
-5-
'

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
TAB
TITLE
Memo for Headquarters from John D. Noble, Jr.,
Subject: LESNIK, George M. (Emergency Instructions
Regarding Custody Of) with Attachment: Emergency
Instructions (2)
DATE
1 Jul 64
/ 2
· 2.
3
4
-
6. Memo for the Record from John M. Maury,
Subject: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts
on the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko Case w/att
5 Aug 69
cts
Nosenko's Request for Political Asylum
4 Feb 64
21 Apr 69.
Secrecy Agreements and Financial Arrangements
Between the CIA and Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko
Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckinridge,
Subject: Office of Security Reports on PARAGON,
NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX I and II and MOCKINGBIRD
Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckinridge,
Subject: Nosenko
Attachments:
31 Dec 74.
13 Jan 75
5
1. Memo for IG from C. W. Kane, Subject: Yurily
Ivanovich Nosenko;
9 Jan 75
1A. Memo for USIB Members from M. Carter, 12 Feb 64,
Subject: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko
12 Feb 64
Questions and Answers Concerning the Treatment of Soviet
Defector Nosenko
Memo for the IG, Subject: The Nosenko Case
67
. 5
Attachment:
1. Summary of 1967 Document Which Outlines the
Nosenko Case
1
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_79.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
IDEN I
Dear IDDEN 1
Reh rence is made to your contract with the UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT, as represented by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,
effective | Maren 1969. Effective ] Atarch 1970 said contract is herein
terminated by mutual consent of the parties thereto, and in lieu thereof
the following agreement is substituted,
The UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, as represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, hereby contracts with you under
the following terms and conditions:
1. STATUS. Your legal status under this contract is that of an
independent contractor or consultant. You are not considered an employec
of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this contract. You
will be required to hold yourself available at all times to fulfill requests
made of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY or to respond to
tasks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. You
will refrain from engaging in other gainful employment or occupation until
approval has been received from the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
Instructions furnished to you pursuant to this contract and within the terms
hereof shall be as binding upon you as if included in the written terma
hereof.
2. COMMUNICATION. In all relationships with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, tasks and relevant
instructions from an individual hereinafter referred to as the "Actiorized
Government Representative." He will be fully authorized to discuss
matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this contract
including, but not limited to, cover arrangements, place of assignment,
conditions of work or any other matters relating to your relationship with
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
3
3. COVER AND SECURITY. In the performance of your
responsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangements will be made
regarding cover and general security conditions. You may be required
to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover
arrangements but it is to be expressly understood that such documents are
solely for the purpose of cover and security and confer no additional
legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and obligations with
respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY derive solely from this
agreement. In connection with cover and security you will be provided
from time to time specific instructions by the Authorized Government
Representative and you will be required to adhere precisely to such
instructions.
SECRET
9:
Others Pen ghrab
HUGMINHA

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_80.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
4. COMPENSATION, You will be compensated by the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY at the rate of Eighteen Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($18,500.00) per year. Payment of this compensation shall be
monthly in accordance with arrangements acceptable to the Authorized
Government Representative. This sum is subject to Federal income taxes.
and to such income tax laws as are applicable to your place of residence.
Additionally, this compensation is subject to FICA taxes, The current
rates and method of payment will be in accordance with applicable laws and
the security instructions issued by the Authorized Government Representative.|
Payment of all taxes and preparation of necessary tax returns are your
personal obligation and responsibility but in accord with appropriate security
instructions which will be furnished by the Authorized Government
Representative.
5. ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
course of fulfilling your responsibilities under this agreement, monetary
allowances would be payable under general UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary
allowances in substantial accordance with those laws and regulations.
If, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are
authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expenses will bend
made by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial accordance
with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY regulations.
6. NEGOTIATED BENEFITS.
☐ a. You presently have a private health insurance plan for
yourself and your wife paid until late December 1970. Prior to
the expiration date of the current policy the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY has the option of paying premiums
on the current policy until 1 March 1972 or enrolling you in a
health insurance program for selected contract individuals
of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY subject to
all the terms and conditions of that program. The CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will pay the premiums on either
insurance coverage until-l-March 1972. However, any new
Contract will include an appropriate clause providing that this
organization will bear a portion of the total premium cost of
any health insurance and you will bear the remainder.
1
6. The CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will endeavor
to arrange for you to secure a term life insurance policy with
a face value of $15,000.00. This policy contains no additional
accidental death benefits. The premiums for the policy will
be your personal responsibility. The current premium charge
is $12.00 per month.
--
-
SECRET
i
i
:
1
i

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_81.jpeg ---
14-00000
¿. .
SECRET
(1) Subject to the priorities of work you are herein
authorized twenty-one (21) work days vacation with pay per
contract year to be taken only at times and places approved
in advance by the Authorized Government Representative,
Vacation time is not ate ruable and will not be carried over
from year to year. Payment for unused vacation time will
not be authorized.
(2) If incapacitated for work due to illness, injury
and the like, your compensation may be continued for periods
not to exceed a total of thirteen (13) working days per contract
year. Periods of absence in excess of three (3) consecutive
days will require a doctor's certificate. Like vacation time,
this benefit is not accruable and will not be carried over from
year to year. Cash payment in lieu of this benefit will not be
authorized.
7. SECRECY OBLIGATION. You will be required to keep forever
secret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason
hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE ·
AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledge that violation of such
secrecy may subject you to criminal prosecution under the espionage lawn,
as amended, and other applicable laws and regulations. Your relationship
with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and this contract must be
kept secret and you may not discuss any aspect of this relationship and
contract with any person other than the Authorized Government
Representative or such other person as he may specifically approve.
8. UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS. No promises or
commitments pertaining to rights, privileges, or benefits other than those
expressly stipulated in writing in this agreement or any amendment thereto
shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
===
-4
9. TERM. This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1970 and
shall be for a term of two (2) years. At the end of that period this contract
shall be deemed to be renewed for another year, unless notice of
termination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance
Thereafter the contract will be renewed automatically on sinülár terms
and conditions. This contract may be terminated at any time by either
party upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice. Upon termination
of this contract or renewals thereof, including amendments, if any, the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake to assist you in
obtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensation to
jassure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of
living. This undertaking is contingent upon your fulfilling the terms of
SEGNET.
CRAZY :
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_82.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
I
ļ
"
SECRET
this contract and the continuing compliance with the secrecy obligations
imposed on you by paragraph of this contract and the provisions of any
secrecy agreement which you have signed with the CENTRAL.
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY:
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
As Represented by the
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
By:
Date:
ACCEPTED:
/ BIDEN 1
WITNESS:
/B/ IDEN 2
IDEN 6.
Contracting Officer'
SECRET
Date:
8 March 6, 1970
5,
Date: 1970
;
i
__

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_83.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
$
1
j
i
25 October 1972
Received this date from an Authorized Government Repre-
sentative three Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on the following banks:
#AI 25-349
Schroder Trust Company
$15,000.00
#FE 54779 Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. 10,000.00
#A593613
Harris Trust & Savings Bank
10,000.00
This is an advance against a back salary payment covering
the period April 1964 to March 1969 which was approved on 18 October
1972. I understand that this advance, $35,000.00, will be deducted
from the total back salary payment covering the specified period when
the finalization of this payment is made in the near future.
.
/s/ IDEN 5
Witness
Date:
....
// IDEN
Pataler 25, 1379.
:
T
!
I
7..

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_85.jpeg ---
14-00000
the
6834-115
UNITED STATES ( VERNMENT
Memorandum
10
:
Files
FROM :
IDEN 2.
:
SUBJECT:
IDEN 1
...
DATE: 13 July 1973
1. On 12-July 1973, the attached Acknowledgement and
Release which was prepared by the General Counsel was signed by
the Subject in the presence of IDEN 5 and witnessed by the
undersigned. There were no problems involved in obtaining the
signature of the Subject who had previously voluntarily stated he
would sign such a document if he would receive the $15,000.00 which
Subject considered was the fulfillment of an Agency promise in 1964
before his defection.
2. Subject understood that the attached did not affect the
existing contractual agreement with Subject and that all stipulations
in that contract were valid and continuing.
=
3. Also attached is a copy of the $13,000.00 Cashier's
Check given to Subject on 12 July 1973 which completed the agreed
sum of $15,000,00, the Subject having previously received $2,000.00
which was a part of the agreed sum.
' /s/ IDEN·2·
Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan
!
h

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_86.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
}
:
:
WHEREAS,
ACKNOWLEDCEMENT. AND RELEASE.
IDEN 1
a former citizen of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and an employee of the Committee for State
Security (KGB), first cooperated with Officers of the United States Govern-
ment and then, subsequently, defected to the United States; and,
WHEREAS,
IDEN 14 was promised certain sums of money for
his cooperation and defection, only part of which have previously been
paid to him; and,
WHEREAS, there remains a certain balance of money agreed upon by
IDEN 1 and Officers of the Central Intelligence Agency;
☑
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of FIFTEEN THOUSAND
and 00/100 Dollars ($15,000.00) the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged,
for himself and for his heirs, executors, admini-
IDEN 1
strators and assigns, hereby releases and forever discharges the United
States Government and the Central Intelligence Agency and all of its
employees and representatives from any claim for money promised to him
claim for money pro
I
for, and/or at the time of his defection, and from any and all other claims
demands and liabilities in any form whatsoever arising out of or in any way.
connected with his cooperation and association with the United States Govern-
ment and the Central Intelligence Agency prior to the date of this document,
12 July 1973.
WITNESS THE FOLLOWING SIGNATURE AND SEAL:
WITNESS;
On Behalf of the United States Government
/s/ IDEN 2
1
/s/
2
IDEN 1
(SEAL)
IDEN 1
:
ER
i

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_84.jpeg ---
1400000
1
:
i
16 NOV 1972
Received this date from an Authorized Government Repre-
Bentative four Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on the following banks:
#15578+
Riggs National Bank
$15,000.00
#01-028564 Union Trust Company
15,000.00
#0661511
American Security & Trust
15,000.00
#2-442275
The National Bank of Washington 7,052.00
The above amount, $52,052.00, together with the $35,000.00
advance received on 25 October 1972, constitutes full payment for back
salary covering the period April 1964 to March 1969.
/s/ IDEN 1
/s/ IDEN 5
Witness:
Date:
Movevler 16, 1972.
}

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_88.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
=
DEFECTORS
:
TAB
TITLE
DATE
l
Memo for Mr. Garrison from S. D. Breckinridge, Cubj:
Information on Detention of Defector
30 Jan 75
2
Memo for IG from Jerrold B. Brown, Subj: Request for
Information (re: Report that NCI fired an employee
for abusing a defector)
18 Jun 75
3
MFR from Walter Elder, Sub: Rockefeller Commission
Contact (re: Report that DGI fired an employee for
abusing a defector)
23 Jun 75
Meno for IG from C. W. Kane. Subj: Alleged Illegal
Activities (Unidentified Subject
Alleged Abuse of
Defector)
27 Jun 75
Routing Slip to S. Breckinridge from F. Bucci *22 Jan 75
Att: Memorandum of Agreement Between the Attorney General
of the United States and the Central Intelligence Agency
for the Entry of Aliens of Interest to the Central
Intelligence Agency under Specific Circumstances
Momo for Inspector General from Jerrold B. Brown, dated
18 Juno 1975, Subject: Request for Information
(ro- DCI firing an employee for abusing a defector)
10 Feb 55
18 June 1975
1341

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_89.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Refector
Review Staff: 75/880
Mr. Ryan
INSPECTOR CEMEN
75-2276
18 June 1975.
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
SUBJECT
Request For Information
=
The Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
says the DCI fired an employee for abusing a de-
fector. Can you uncover the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known to us? (John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of "any piece of paper" sent to the
Commission on the reported incident or of any
others. He suggests checking Office of Security)
A 4
CC: DDO
John Waller
SECRET
3
IBB
Jerry
Jerrold B. Brown
neil

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_91.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
way
SE-CR-T
LÄHIBIT 2
Upon completion of their intelligence or operational purposes in
the United States, or if internal security reasons so require, these allens
will be removed therefrom through the arrangements and at the expense of
the Central Intelligence Agency, except in those cases in which other dis-
position is made of a nature satisfactory to the Service. Also, the Central
Intelligence Agency will inform the Service sufficiently in advance of each
proposed departure as to permit verification thereof if the Service so elects.
In accordance with past practice, the Servicos will apprise the FBI of
the entry and departure or other disposition of these allons.
The Service will maintain separate and secure files under this
agreement.
- 2.
7
5/5
Herbert Brownell, Jr.
Attorney General
5/2
-- -Allen W.: Dilles-
Director or Central Intelligence.
(Feb 10 1955).
S-E CR-E-T
..

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_87.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
IDEN 1
Dear
IDEN 1
Reference is made to your contract with the United States Government,
as represented by the Central Intelligence Agency, effective 1 March 1970.
Effective 1 March 1974, said contract is amended by revising the first
sentence of paragraph four (4) entitled "Compensation" to read as follows:
"You will be compensated by the Central Intelligence Agency
at the rate of Twenty-Three Thousand Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars
($23,750) per year.
effect.
All other terms and conditions of said contract remain in full force and
Please acknowledge by signing in the space provided below.
"
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
BY'
/s/ IDEN 3
Special Contracting Officer
ACCEPTED:
/s/ IDENT
George Martin Rosnek
WITNESS: »
way 9, 1974
Date
/s/ IDEN 2
APPROVED:
91may1974
Date
/s/ IDEN 4
1773-74
Date
EZIMPDET
CL by: 063837.
:

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO
DANMA
IDENTIFICATION:
BACKGROUND
APPROVAL
:
"
NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet
KGB officer who defected in 1964 and
was subsequently involuntarily con-
fined in the U.S. by the Agency for
a period of approximately three years.
NOSENKO first contacted Agency per-
sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962
and subsequently defected in January
1964. NOSENKO was brought to the U.S.
and after a period of relative freedom.
he was involuntarily confined in
April 1964. From April 1964 to
August 1965, he was confined at an
Agency controlled site in Clinton,
Maryland. From August 1965 to
October 1967, NOSENKO was confined
at Camp Peary, Virginia. In October
1967, he was returned to the Washington
area, given increasing amounts of
freedom until he was given total free-
dom in April 1969. NOSENKO became a
U.S. citizen in April 1974. NOSENKO
·
was employed by the Agency, as a
'
consultant in March 1969 and continues
under contract to date. His present
salary is $23,500 per year.
(1) The legal basis to confine NOSENKO
against his will was discussed by
Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with
the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April
1964 (Tab 1). On 3 April 1964, the
Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence
Houston, advised the Director of Security
by memorandum that such confinement was
proper (Tab 2).
(2) There are a series of letters from
the DDCI, DCI and others to various
agencies, including the Department of
Justice and the White House, covering
the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing
awareness of these agencies of the
NOSENKO affair (Tab 3).
(3) The conditions of NOSENKO's confine-
ment were established by the Office of
Security (Tabs 4 & 5).

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_90.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
;
:
_
S-E-C-RE-
EXHIBIT 2
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES
AND THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY FOR THE ENTRY OF ALIENS OF INTEREST TO
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY UNDER SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES
The Central Intelligence Agency has frequent nood for the covert
crumbrary entry of aliens into the United States for intelligence and
operational purposes within its jurisdiction.
To effectuate entry in such cases, the Central Intelligence Agency
will submit each such alien's case in writing to the Commissioner of
Immigration and Naturalization with the request to defor inspection of
the subject upon arrival and parole to the Central Intelligence Agency
under the authority of Section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act.
In order that the intelligence benefits to be derived from such
- entries not be outweighed by the dangers, if any, to the internal security
of the United States by the presence of such aliens, the Contral Intelligence
Agency agrees that it will take all necessary steps to establish the bona
fides of each prospective entrant prior to submittal to the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. It further agrees: (a) That this method of entry
will only be utilized where it is strictly in the national interest; (b) That
each request will be accompanied by a summary of pertinent background and blo-
graphical data with particular emphasis on aspects bearing on internal
security and admissibility under the immigration laws, as well as the results
of a current check of the FBJ file; and (c) That the placo,-time and manner
of arrival will be coordinated with the Service in advance thereof.
71
Fach alien whose entry is authorized by the Commissioner under the
foregoing procedure will be paroled for such period of time as may be agreed
on by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Service, in-no-Instance to
exceed one-year. Further extensions of parole, similarly limited, may be
authorized thereafter on a written statement of need, which include the
results of a current security check.
Upon arrival each allen will execute an agreement acknowlodging
parole status in a form satisfactory to the Central Intelligence Agency and
the Service.
After parole of such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will
assume responsibility for care, supervision and control of a kind and degree
it believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States
during continuance of their parole status. Further, in the case of any alien
whose physical custody is not to be maintained or is to be terminated, the.
Central Intelligence Agency will arrange for presentation of each alien for
registration pursuant to law at a time and place satisfactory to the Service.
'
SECRET

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_92.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐ UNCLASSIFIED
☐
1.. ERNAL
USE ONLY
☐ CONF.NTIAL
SECKET
-
SUBJECT: (Optional)
FROM:
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
Alleged Illegal Activities
(Unidentified Subject--Alleged Abuse of Defector)
Charles W. Kane
Director of Security
TO: (Officer designation, room number, and
building)
LISAR'
---
EXTENSION
NO
b
6777 DATE
27 JUN 1975
DAY!
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
RECEIVED
KAWARDED
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
to whom, Draw a line across coumn after each comment.)
1.
DDA
2.
3.
Inspector General
Att: Mr. Ainslic
3.
Dr. Chamberlain
-
SUB
8.
7.
8
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
FORM
J-32
Ryan
310 JUN 1875
7
_
n
3-5: Attached was prepared in.
response to an 18 June:
request from Jerry Brown
Per 23 Jun, MFR by Walt
Elder, source of the story
is a deposition by Mr. Helms
3
This
before passt
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
SECRET
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY ☐ UNCLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_95.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
i
SECRET
10. It is noted that Office of Security files contained
only fragmentary information in regard to certain areas of the
Torpats' case. File review indicated, however, the DDO, OGC
and the Inspector General's office will probably have addition-
al information concerning this matter.
3
SECRET
le
Charles W. Kane
Director of Security

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_93.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
5. Wing
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
ATTENTION
:
Mr. Neil Ainslie
:
INSPECTOR GENERAL
175-11
7 JUN 1975
.VIA
SUBJECT
Deputy Director for Administration
Alleged Illegal Activities
(Unidentified Subject--Alleged Abuse
of Defector)
1.
Reference is made to Mr. Ainslie's verbal request
for a review of Office of Security files in an effort to
provide information pertinent to a case mentioned on page
170 of the Report to the President by the Commission on CIA
activities within the United States.
2. The case in question from page 170 of the Commission
Report is quoted as follows: "In one other case, a defector'
was physically abused, although not seriously injured. The
Director of Central Intelligence discharged the employee in
volved "
3.
A search of Office of Security file resources has
reflected information pertinent to a case in which a defector
was physically abused at an overseas location, and the Agency
employee was later terminated by the DCI.
by the DCI. It is not known
whether the following case is identical to the referenced
case on page 170 of the Commission Report, but the facts
appear to be quite similar.
4. Information developed by this Office of possible in-
terest to the Inspector General, pertains to one John Torpats,
an ex-CIA employee, and one Eduard Oun, an Estonian defector.
5. Torpats was born in 1898 in Estonia, and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1926. Torpats was employed by
CIA in February 1949 and was terminated 30 January 1961. The
file information reflected that in July 1956, Torpats was found
guilty of mistreatment of an alien by a Special Inquiry Board
SECRET
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 011018
in 53922

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_96.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
viny
-6942
6:24
75-2844
Review Staff:
23 June 1975
75/1008
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
i
SUBJECT:
Rockefeller Commission Contact
Wwg
= OC
Mason Cargill told me today that the reference
in the Commission report to an employee who was fired
because he abused a defector came from a deposition by
Dick Helms Helms could not remember an exact name
but from the description which he gave on his deposition,
it is clear that the employee who was fired was John
Torpats. He was discharged by Allen W. Dulles in 1960.
•
Torpats, himself a Lithuanian refugee, was working
in the Defector Reception Center in Frankfort, Germany.
In the course of interrogating another Lithuanian
defector, Torpats beat him. After Torpats was fired,
he sued the Director (then McCone). He lost the case.
Waet Elder
Walter Elder
CC
éc
CC
-
-
-
DCI
IG
OGC
:
1
SECRET
CB:
007789
E2 IMPDET
T
1

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_97.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Inspector General
SUBJECT
Review Staff: /5/880
Mi. Kyan
:
INSDICTOR CIHENN
75-2276
18 June 1975
Request For Information
The Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
says the DCI fired an employee for abusing a de-
fector. Can you uncover the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known to us? (John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of "any piece of paper" sent to the
Commission on the reported incident or of any
others. He suggests checking Office of Security)
BB
Jerrold B. Brown
CC: DDO
John Waller
Ad. C. Mardirosian.
57-1#3
Dist
SECRET
__
!

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_94.jpeg ---
4-00000
:
:
SECRET
1
in Frankfurt, West Germany. The alien involved was Eduard
Oun, an Estonian who defected from Estonia through Sweden
in 1955.
6.
The incident in Frankfurt involved mistreatment of
Oun during interrogations directed by Torpats. The charges
of physical abuse included the striking of Oun with the fist;
application of turpentine and ointments to various parts of
the body, the scrubbing of Oun's body with a brush, and forc-
ing Oun to stand in the nude as long as eight days during
interrogations with only very brief rest periods.
7. Torpats was returned to Headquarters and was brought
before an Employment Review Board for consideration of separa-
tion from the Agency. The Board's recommendations initially_
were that Torpats be "transferred to an ar
area outside the
Clandestine Services." Torpats appealed the decision, and a
later recommendation included reduction in grade from GS-14
to GS-13. Torpats later received unsatisfactory fitness re-
ports and engaged in various "in house" battles with Agency
officials concerning his employment.
8. Torpats was later terminated in accordince with the
authority granted the DCI under Section 102(C) of the National
Security Act of 1947, as ammended, effective 30 January 1961.
Later in 1961, Torpats_filed suit against-the-DCI contesting:
his dismissal, and the US District Court for the District of
Columbia granted the government's motion for summary judgment
against Torpats. Torpats appealed the decision, and the U.S.
Court of Appeals, in 1962, upheld the lower court's ruling
that Torpats! termination was legal.
9. The Office of Security file of Eduard Oun contained
little information other than interrogation reports dated 1956.
It was not clear from file information whether Oun entered the
United States after the Frankfurt incident. The most recent
document contained in the Oun file was dated 17 September
1956 and noted that Oun had been psychiatrically examined and
found qualified for Agency sponsored immigration to the U.S.
under Public Law 203..
2
SECRET
.

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_98.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
1675-0385
16 7.5 -03
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Garrison
SUBJECT
30 January 1975
1: Information on Detention of Defector.
->
1. The Deputy General Counsel has requested documents
bearing on the decision to confine a defector, particularly the
considerations at the time such decisions were made and
reviewed, as may be reflected in memoranda for the record.
staff studies, etc., leading to the initial confinement, the
later decisions to continue that confinement, the decision to
move to a new facility in Virginia, and eventually to release
him.
2. The assumption is that following the initial decision
this matter was reviewed formally from time to time, and that
those reviews are reflected in some way in the records of the
Agency
7s/ S. D. Creation
S. D. Breckinridge
Original
Original Addressee
-
SDB Chrono.
K. Sudy Cor De files
QA
SECRET
3190
1131

--- Image 104-10227-10000_page_99.jpeg ---
14-00000
_
Excerpts from Meeting No. 2 with Nosenko
Reel No. 1, 11 June 1962 (The quality of the tape is very poor.)
Translated from Russian by P. D.
(N. talks about surveillance of Soviet personnel in the United States.) ·
Nonenko: Let me tell you
-
I (---) I was also in the States, although under
another name.
I had a certain business there
•
O.
This was (7) in Washington (?)?
Nosenko: Yes, I was thero.
Q: On TDY?
Nosenko: 19 days, 19 days only.
Q: Under what name?
Nosenko: NIKOLAYEV.
Q: NIKOLAYEV?
Nosenko: In England I was NIKOLAYEV and in your country I was NIKOLAYEV.
Q: first and middle name?
-
Nosenko: Yes, Yuriy, Yuriy, also Yuriy.
Q: And in England you also were for a short time?
Nosenko: In England I was for ten and fifteen days
Note: During the interrogation of Nosenko in 1964, he denied that he ever
said that he was in the United States.
:
2.
You stated previously that while traveling to England and Cuba, you were
documented as Nikolayev. Under what cover did you travel to those countries?
What was your Legend-Biography?
:
Note: Any KGB officer going abroad under another name and under
cover prepares a Legend-Biography to cover up his real
identity. If Nosenko travelled as Nikolayev, then his legend
omitted "the fact" that he was a son of a Minister because
there was no Minister of Shipbuilding Industry with the name
of Nikolayev, etc., etc.)
3. You stated previously that in January 1960 you were processed to go to the
US with the Soviet Automotive Delegation. You obtained a passport in your
true name, Nosenko, but the date was postponed, then cancelled. Who
selected your candidacy for the trip? What were you supposed to do in
the USA? Why was the trip postponed? Why were you processed in your
true name, Nosenko, and not under the name Nikolayev, under which you
visited Erstand en vigilate
"
"