

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_1.jpeg ---
104-10435-10071
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
00000
'
L
I
IP CONTROL NO. (Filled in by IP/CFS)
SECRET
(When Filled In).
F
DOCUMENT SERVICE REQUEST
FR
HOLMES RUSSELL. B
CIVEXO
EXT. 1253
HM-788
2D4921
TUBE CT5
DATE OF REQUEST
:
15 SEP 1977
BRANCH
ROOM NO.
PHONE NO.
SECRET
E2 IMPDET CL BY 004108
TO:
1
IP/CFS
DT-6
2
REQUESTER
3
IP/CFS
DT-6
4
5
10
DATE
INITIALS
RCD.
FWD.
INSTRUCTIONS
1. Use this form to request files and/or documents
from IP/CFS. (Not to be used in lieu of Form
362.)
2. Include badge number and tube station in "FROM"
block if gummed label has not been issued.
3. Indicate type of charge:
☑
Temporary
☐ Permanent
4. Indicate source of reference:
Document reference from IP/MI.
Document reference from source other
than IP/MI.
SUBJECT (must be furnished)
DIMITROV, Dimitur Adamov
HQ FILE NUMBER
?
?
?
?
?
:
?
N
DOCUMENT SYMBOL
AND NUMBER
DOCUMENT
DATE
ATHE 3200 (IN 46672) 25.10.50
ATHE 4821 (IN 30224) 22.3.51
ATHE 5150 (IN 36130) 20.4.51
FRAN 2910 (IN 36297) 21.4.51
ATHE 5205 (IN 37092) 25.4.51
NATHE 5282 (IN 37839) 29.4.51
DISPOSITION OF REQUEST
(To be completed by IP/CFS)
NO RECORD IN IP/FILES.
Copy May Be Obtained
In Cable Archives
41-EL
2-77
1
FORM 1870
USE PREVIOUS
SECRET
E-2, IMPDET CL. BY: 062147
(38)
EDITIONS

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_10.jpeg ---
13-00000
4.
minent members of the Gichev Agrarians and of the Democratic Party would
be assisted in escaping to Greece (presumably from Bulgaria) to join the
organization.
DIMITROV listed the organization's tasks as follows:
a.
b.
Intelligence activity in Bulgaria.
Organization of an underground resistance
movement in Bulgaria, and
c. Organization of sabotage activity against
Bulgaria.
DIMITROV revealed that he was the president of the organization.
DIMIRTOV took frequent occasion to mention that the
committee had its headquarters in the American Embassy where he has a
room assigned for his own use. He also stated that the commitee maintains
offices at 13 Patission Street, 7th floor, rooms 2-4, and there are already
working at this address sight Bulgarian-speaking Americans. He also stated
that hos office has two Bulgarian typewriters and a car with US license
plates.
SODB 31992, 14 December 1950

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_100.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Security Information
+
15. Now that he had returned to Athens KELLY's intentions were to earn
sufficient funds ($2000) to build a home for his daughter. He was not con-
cerned with Flora as he had married her for the purpose of getting to the
United States. The marriage was to be a temporary affair as they were not in
love with each other and had no intentions of remaining married. Our information
shows that KELLY worked for the Propaganda Section of the Greek General Staff
headed by Lt. Colonel M. A. Alexandrakis on his return to Athens. In order to
earn money KELLY decided to write several books on anti-Communism. Since he
was not fluent in Greek be sought the assistance of a Greek scholar who could
translate his writings from Bulgarian into Greek. KELLY said he wrote two
texts and turned them over to a Greek educator to translate..
.
16. In August 1950 KELLY decided to take his texts to the American Embassy
in Athens and inquire as to the possibility of having the texts translated into
English and published in the United States. He said he was directed to a Mr.
Ewning (probably Mr. Donald F. Ewing), Chief of Information Service, who in turn
introduced him to a Mr. Willard Allan also an official at the American Embassy
in Athens. KELLY stated that after several meetings with Mr. Allan he was asked
by Mr. Allan to work with the Americans. KELLY immediately volunteered and was
told in order to get an organization that could accomplish its mission he would
need several assistants. He explored the Lagrion refugee camp for potential staff
personnel and was given the names of Ivan Hristonov and Ivan and Dimitur Doneva
Upon the suggestion of the Americans, KELLY said he accepted the persons named,
He established a headquarters and proceeded planning operations to penetrate
Bulgaria. · KELLY claimed the Greeks and certain Bulgarian emigre leaders in
Greece were opposed to his position with the Americans and did everything
possible to belittle his position and impair his operations. The results of
KELLY's abortive missions into Bulgaria are contained in a report which KELLY
prepared at DTROBALO and which is now in his file.
17. During the period in which he was trying to get his operations
mounted into Bulgaria, KELLY was approached by the French IS to work for them.
KELLY stated that he immediately informed his American superiors regarding the
French approach and was thereafter directed by the Americans in his dealings
and associations with the French IS.
18. KELLY listed the following American personnel with whom he coordinated
all his activities: The Chief, name unknown to KELLY -probably Mr. MacLean,
Mr. Willard Allan, Miss Vera George (Mr. Allan's secretary), Mrs. Kingsley
(connected with the Radio Station), Mr. George and Mr. Clef (training officers).
KELLY referred to the following Bulgarian personnel as having been associated
with his organization and with whom he was acquainted: Ivan Hristonov, whom he
believes supplanted him in the organization in Athens; Ivan and Dimitur Donev,
whom he claims are presently in Argentina; Choyo. Stonovski (probably Stoyo
Chonovski); Andon Andonov; Gospodin Gospodinov; Hristo Traikov; Vasil Yanchev;
Rafail Karakachanov; Dimitur Tabakov; Todor Hadjiev and Ivan Gagov.
CRET
19. KELLY continued

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_103.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Security Information
-7-
whom he had met in Athens and tried to recruit for his organization, or else
he had been told of them by other sources. In reply to queries and in his own
story, he made no statement which would indicate that he is cognizant of current
Bulgarian operations.
D. I feel confident that KELLY realizes that his chances of resuming his
role in Greece are at an end and therefore he has resolved to do the next best
thing and that is to contact a former Greek companion (Mr. Karapides) who is a
successful business man in Caracas, Venezuela and seek employment. KELLY is
eager to be resettled and to get out of DTROBALO.
E. I recognize that KELLY is familiar with certain former operations and
agents involved in those operations which, if revealed to unauthorized persons;
could become embarrassing. However, I feel that KELLY's knowledge of current
operations is so minute that the security risks involved to our current operations
would be very little, if any, if he were resettled. Therefore, my recommendation
is to process himfor resettlement.
ECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_106.jpeg ---
13-00000
Re KELLY CASE
File Kelly
4 April 1952
1.
A well-placed, reliable source (A-1) has stated that the 1949 files of
French Intelligence network "Ulysse" of Captain Michel de la Roncier
(Military Attache of the French Embassy, Athens) listed Dimitri Dimitrov
as an agent and contains the following informations
"30 years old, a member of the Bulgarian Agrarian Party. He is a
student and fled to Greece in 1946. He was in contact with the British
brothers Baret (or Barev) while the later were in Greece. He is a contact
of the Aliens Directorate. He received an order from the Americans requesting
him to go to Washington for a time. His file contains two reports, one
10
dated 6 April 1949 conterning the military situation and the other dated
6 April 1949 containing an account of the Greek Government Council of Co-
ordination. (Translations of these two documents was not made because the
contents no longer seem to be of any importance)."
2. His prior connection with the French in 1949 doubtless led Dimitrov to
make the later offer to Florimond to sell US information for 16,000,000.
drachmae. Florimond was chief of the other French network in Greece
operating from Salonica while de la Roncier conducted French operations
out of Athens.
3. The Baret or Barev brothers undoubtedly are Tsenko and Ivan Barev, now
worked
in Paris and Rome, respectively. They are Bulgarians who have/and may be
still working with the British.
☐ LT
Above memo given to Col Smith. The info was furnished by Mr. Driscoll of
SO-3. French Intel documents giving the above were intercepted by a
penetration of French Intel files. Dimitrov was designated as Uly 62 on
the list of agents.
LT

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_102.jpeg ---
13-00000
Security Information.
(
-60
b. He was placed in confinement at Panama to undergo mental and
physical check-ups to assure his recovery from the ordeal which he had
undergone. His confinement at DTROBALO was to prevent his contemplated
and announced escape.
KELLY's stay at DTROBALO apparently is dependent on his quali-
fications to meet resettlement requirements. I told him I was not able to
Judge when he had fulfilled those requirements. There was also the task
involved of finding suitable positions for individuals with varied skills
in South America.
d. I told KELLY that there was no opportunity for him to work with
the organization because the men and organization as known to him are no
longer existent.
e. I told KELLY that I believe the texts were returned to Greece
but that I would make a further check on my return to Washington,
f. KELLY was told that the people whom he knew in Athens and Sofia
were no longer with the organization and therefore it was impossible for
them to visit him.
.
g. I told KELLY that I did not know anything about his wife and child
other than the fact that KELLY was married and that his wife and child.
resided in Athens. I again queried KELLY concerning his wishes regarding
his family. KELLY asked how long it would take to bring the family to
South America if that were possible. I replied that I had no definite
answer. KELLY said that only if he knew he had to remain at DTROBALO
indefinitely would he request to have his wife and child with him.
COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
'
A. I found KELLY to be a frail, nervous, alert, and extremely talkative
person. During the twelve hour conference with KELLY I frequently interrupted
him to query him on persons and activities he referred to in his story only to
find him replying briefly and persistently requesting to be allowed to continue
relating his thoughts and feelings.
B. In relating his story of the organization he established and members
who comprised the organization KELLY appeared to have a clear and concise
picture of operations he directed and names and descriptions of people with whom
he had come in contactį.
-
C. It is my opinion that KELLY knows little about operations in Greece.
I believe KELLY was so wrapped up in his own abortive missions and personnel
difficulties while in Greece that he paid little, if any, attention to operations
that were running concurrently. KELLY mentioned names of agents who are bing
currently used in Bulgarian operations; however, he referred to them as Bulgarians
:
SECRET
whom he had met

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_101.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
SECRET
Security Information.
-50
19. KELLY continued by stating that he was apprehended by the Greek Police,
allegedly for safe keeping in April 1951. He was placed in detention and re-
mained under Greek control until his departure from Greece to Frankfurt by air.
From Frankfurt he was transported to Panama where he arrived on 5 September 1951.
He was placed in detention at a hospital in Panama and was of the opinion that
perhaps the hospital was an exterminating establishment for undesirables. Later,
however, he said he learned otherwise and through a friend, Mr. Stanley, learned
that he was sent to Panama to undergo several physical check-ups and that after
that was completed he would be removed to an area some 50 miles sway where he
would enjoy full freedom. Also that he would remain at his new location long
enough to learn a language and prepare himself for resettlement. When he in-
quired how long that would be he was told that would be about six months,
20. In March 1952 KELLY was transferred to DTROBALO. He stated that he
remained at DTROBALO for six months and after that period he confronted the
authorities concerning his release and resettlement. Approximately one month
later KELI said he informed the Station authorities that he would leave the
area if they did not release him as initially promised. He stated that he was
apprehended and placed in confinement until his release in May 1953.
21. KELLY advised that the above is a true account of his past ex-
periences and in view of my limited stay in DTROBALO would appreciate any answer
I could give him regarding questions that have never been resolved and con-
sequently have disturbed him. KELLY apparently had a list of questions prepared
which he drew from a notebook and proceeded to read. The questions were as
follows:
&.
Why was he apprehended by the Greek Police?
b. Why was he placed in confinement in Panama and later at DTROBALO?
c. How much longer must he remain at DTROBALO?
d. Is there any possibility of his working with the organization
(CIA) to complete the mission he initiated?
e. What happened to the texts he wrote that were taken to the
United States by Mr. Willard Allan?
f. Why haven't any of his old friends visited him during the past
two years?
g. In regards to his family -KELLY stated that only as a last
resort and only if he had to remain at DTROBALO would he want his family
there. He would prefer working and saying sufficient money($2000) to
purchase or build a home for them in Greece and drop the whole matter,
In resplanse to the above questions I told Kelly that:
a.
He was apprehended by the Greek Police because of his proposed
negotiation with the French IS.
SECRET
b. He was placed

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_105.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Security Information
-
7. The American case officer who handled him in Athens reported,
"Early in our relations with Kelly we foresaw the need to curb him or
eliminate him from our operations. Since, however, he was necessary to
us, we tried to use him, restraining him and teaching him the while.
Kelly, unfortunately, did not learn he got worse. He 'borrowed' and
stole money from many sources. He lied to many people, including us, and
he developed an infantile megalomania in which he persisted in considering
himself the forthcoming Minister-President of Bulgaria.". During his detention.
incarceration at DTROBALO, we understand that these same character traits
have been evident,
for some time
8. This Division believes that Subject's confinement should be
continued indefinitely to preclude the probability that he would again
try to contact the French or another Intelligence Service, foreign
Governments, or the press in order to capitalize on the information he
possesses concerning CIA, its operations against Bulgaria, the details
of his removal from Athens and information of disposal methods acquired
during his incarceration at Panama.
detention att DTROBALO.
.
ac
Chy WHD
clops
SEGRET
JOHN K. BAKER
CHELF, SE
TATER F

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_104.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Security Information
MEMORANDUM FOR: ACTING CHIEF, OPERATIONS, DD/F
27 March 1953
Chief, FI/STC
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Lyle 0. Kelly
Memorandum from Acting Chief, Operations, DD/P dated
7 January 1953, to Chief, SE
1. Since this Division has no facilities for the disposal of hard-
core cases, the matter of Subject's disposal was discussed with the Chief,
-
DDF/Admin after receipt of reference. It is amunting the
is making avionizem for the handling of suc
vata
time in
The hear
2. For your information in making ultimate disposition of this case,
this Division has reached the conclusion, based on facts set forth in the future
following paragraphs, that Kelly, if released from confinement, will be a
source of serious embarrassment to CIA.
3. Subject, & Bulgarian refugee in Greece, was the principal agent
in an ill-fated operation run from October 1950 to March 1951. The
operation resulted in a major expose and trial in Sofia during 1951. The
agents used were those selected by Subject, at least one of whom was
probably an operative of the Bulgarian Militia and acted as the betrayer
of his colleagues.
4. Subject's behavior during his employment was extraordinarily bad
and characterized by a complete lack of security and a conscious effort
on his part to aggrandize himself at the expense of the United States and
his fellow agents. Unfortunately, during the time of his use by us, he
acquired considerable information about CIA personnel, operations and
installations in Greece. He was permitted to come and go freely in
CIA offices in the American Embassy.
A
5. Through another informant the Athens Station learned in early
1951 that Subject had contacted French Intelligence officers in Greece
and had agreed to sell complete details on U. S. plans for operations
against Bulgaria for the sum of 16,000,000 drachmae. All subsequent
information on this transaction corroborates the veracity of the original
informant's stary including a French document secured through another CIA
channel which shows that as early as 1949 Subject had been an agent of a
Franch Intelligence network run by the Military Attache of the French
Embassy in Athens.
detention
certain
6. At the urgent request of the Athens Station that Subject be
removed immediately from Athens, arrangements were made for his trans-
portation and incarceration at DTROBALO. To facilitate his removal,
Subject was told that he was being taken to the United States for a
meeting of important satellite refugee leaders. He was flown by CIA plane
to Germany, and from there to Panama by U.S. Army plane.
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_11.jpeg ---
13.00000
23: October 1950
provisional
EE Division requests an/operational clearance for DIMITROV.
Memorandum for II/OS, dated 23 October 1950.
:
i

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_107.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
SEMITY INFORMATION
NEMORANDUM FOR: WH DIVISION
ATTENTION:
Colonal Smith
29 February1952
2.51
SUBJECT:
Kelly Case
1. In accordance with your request, the following information,
which may be helpful in connection with subject's rehabilitation, is
furnished.
2. All the information we have concerning Kelly's life prior
to his arrival in Greece was furnished by Kelly himself and is almost
wholly unsubstantiated. This, in brief, is Kelly's story: He was
born 7 May 1924 in Madkovets, Bulgaria. He studied philology in
1942-43 at the University of Sofia. In 1942 he joined a secret branch
of the Bulgarian National Agrarian Union and worked slosely with Dr.
Georgi M. Dimitrov in anti-Fascist activities (a claim which Dr.
Dimitrov has denied.) After emerging briefly from hiding in September
1944, he again went underground, engaging in anti-Commanist activities
in various cities and towns in Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and Macedonia
where he urged members of the Agrarian Party to take action against
the Communists. In October 1946 he was arrested by the pòlics,
sentenced to death, but not executed as the Communists wished to use
him as a witness against the Agrarian leader Nikola Petkor. On 23 July
1947 he escaped to Gresos.
3. Further light is thrown on Kelly's experiences in a mamu-
script which he claimed to have written and delivered to U. S.
authorities in Greece with the prupose of finding a publisher for
this, and other, material. It subsequently developed that Kelly was
not the anthor of these papers but rather had furnished information
to a Greek friend (John Calavanos) who was the real author. A rough
translation of one of these documents is enclosed.
4. Because of his undeniable organizational ability, tremendous
energy and glib, but largely untruthful, salesmanship, Kelly was able
to organize a group of Bulgarian immigrants in Greece into what he
called the Bulgarian Democratic Elos. His use by this agency was
believed advisable insomuch as his organization provided the potential
for recruiting infiltration agents within a shorter time and with
fewer political strings attached than any other emigre groups. Further,
more, his organization provided a convenient name for use as a front to
cover operational activities. As a result of the limited recognition
and support. given him and of his own success in providing agents,
Kally developed a certain megalomania and consequently lost his initial
popularity through dictatorial conduct and completely unwarranted
behavior as the future head of the liberated Bulgarian state. An
American case officer who was intimately involved with the Kelly oper-
ations at this period has furnished the following statement:
"Early in
SECRET
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_110.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
☑
:
possible disposal in Caracas,
d. SE/PC would attempt to check on Karapides life and
activities when he was in Greece.
3. During the discussion of possible solutions to the felly
case, it was explicitly understood and agreed between Col. Smith and
the representatives of SE/PC that responsibility and initiative for
Kelly's disposal now clearly rests with the WH Division and that the
responsibility of SB/PG extends only to that support and assistance -
specifically requested by the WH Division. It was further understood,
however, that SE/PC still has a direct interest in Kelly's disposal
in view of his wife and child's presence in Greece and their present
undetermined relationship to Kelly's permanent disposal, i. o. whether
it is possible and desirable that they join hime
1 CHARLES 7. ADAMSO
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_111.jpeg ---
13-00000
JAN
PARTIAL - PERSO
-TY HISTORY OF LYLE KELLY
E file
C
1.Financial Finagling in Greece
B
BULGARIAN
(a) In February, 1951, when Kelly was head of the Democratic Bloc,
three of his men arrived in Athens, coming directly from IRO camps.
They needed shelter, but had no money. They were put on salary, but it
was not enough to cover the sixmonths advance rent which it is the custom
to pay when a lease is made in Athens. Thus Kelly's advance account was
credited with axxx the amount of (dec) $850, which was to be used
to pay the rental advance. The three men were to pay it back in monthly
installments.
Two such installments were paid by the men when Kelly was "interned"
by our people. The men were then able to complain that Kelly had forced
them into quarters best described as "very inadequate, insecurean and
unhealthy.
Comparing the quality of the quartess with the amount advanced for
rent,it becomes quite certain that Kelly made some sort of deal with the
landlord in order to make some money.
"
It should be kept in mind that Kelly forced three of his own countrymen
to live in these quarters, from which they were forthwith removed for
health and security reasons.
(b) Just prior to his removal, it was discovered that Kelly had, a
cash shortage of over $100 which was not accounted for in any way. When
an attempt was made to collect the money, it was discovered that Kelly
had spent it on himself.
2. Ruskrip Manuscript Episode
In December, 1950, Willard Allen, in accordance with a promise made
to Kelly, brought with him to this country three manuscripts, ostensibly
written by Kelly. Allen was to see what he could do to have these manu-
sripts published here. Kelly hoped to thus exploit and dramatize hie
escape from Bulgaria. He was given, by us, a $300 advance on the publi-
cation of the manuscripts.
-
On December 14, 1951, in a conversation with Mr. Allen, it was learned
by us that Kelly had not written the manuscripts at all. Allen learned this
himself when the real author wrote to him demanding the return of his
works. The author said that he had a statement from Kelly disclaiming all
credit for the manuscripts. Furthermore, the real author had seen nothing
of the $300 given to Kelly, although they apparently had agreed to go
50-50 on any profits realized from the publication of the manuscripts.
Et is clear that Kelly lied to us, and used someone else's literary:
talentsin the hope of gaining noteriety and money himself.
3. Relations with the French
.
In early 1951, Kelly informed our people in Athens that a French
Vice Consul from Salonica had contacted him in the hope of getting Kelly
to work withods for his country. Kelly was allowed by us to continue.
seeing this man until it was determined just what the French wanted in the
way of information. This point was reached, and Kelly was told not to see
his Frenchman or any Frenchmen after a certain Thursday. We know definitely
that Kelly saw saw his Frenchman on the following Friday, Saturday, and
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_109.jpeg ---
13-00000
r
21 Jarmary 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
Meeting with Col. Smith of WH re Kelly Cases
20 December 1951,
1. Menars. Potts, Adamson, and Gregg met with Cal. Smith on
20 December 1951 for the purpose of discussing a new development in
the Kelly case and determining the future course of action in regard
to the disposal of Kelly, The new development was the statement by
the Athene Senior CIA Representative during his visit to Washingte
in early December to the effect that Kelly no longer constitutes a
security hasard to current Bulgarian operations in Greece since the
knowledge that Kelly has about Bulgarian operations is now outdatede
At present as far as Bulgarian operations in Greece are concerned
the main problem is to keep Kelly out of Greece and, if possible,
prevent his direct correspondence with people in Greece, in order to
preclude his interfering with and stirring up the Bulgarian emigration
in that country.
2. It was pointed out to Cal. Smith that in view of this new
development, SE/PC feels that it is now possible to begin planning
and effecting the permanent disposal of Kelly. Col. Saith indicated
that he felt that no immediate solution would be necessary, as Kelly
could be treated as an exploited agent and handled under the disposal
and rehabilitation projects which the WH Division is now developing.
Col. Smith felt that Kally could be held for a few more months, if
necessary, in his present location until these projects were approved,
However, in view of the possible immediate and permanent solution to
Kelly's disposal offered by his friend Johannes Karapides in Caracas,
Venesuela, it was agreed that the following action would be taken
as soon as possibles
a. WHI would briaf the Caracas Chief of Station and investigate
Karapides
b. WH would attempt to learn more from Panama about Kelly's
relationship to Karapides.
c. WII should investigate the problem of documenting Kelly
for

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_113.jpeg ---
13-00000
( 3 )
(c) From Memorandum for the Record, 27 Nov. 1951, signed by
Wilson Prichett%; "Kelly's wife is being supported at the rate of one
million drachmas a month through Alien Directorate by (BulgarianProject)"
(d) From a letter written by Kelly to a friend in Greece, dated
27 December, 1951. ". I succeeded in leaving Greece, and freeing my
soul from the slavery of Flora.... I want for the present that Flora will
lose all traces of me.
(e) From Kelly's letter to his wife. " you should be happy to
ask God to protect us from harm and to unite us soon if possible.”

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_108.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
2.
SECRET C
SECURITY INFORMATION
"Early in our relations with Kelly we foreas the need to curb
him or eliminate him from our operations. Since, however, he was
necessary to us, we tried to use him, restraining him and teaching
him the while. Kelly, unfortunately, did not learn – he got
worse. He 'borrowed' and stale money from many sources. He lied
to many people, including us, and he developed an infantile mega-
lomania in which he persisted in considering himself the forth-
coming Minister-President of Bulgaria.”
On the Kelly credit side, the statement addss
wwe suspected at the time that he was not the new 'white hope,
but we needed someone through when we could obtain bodies. We
obtained bodies through Kelly and actually have accomplished some
substantive work. Thus it must be remembered that Kelly performed.
a useful service for us."
5. The incident which made of Kelly an immediate disposal problem
developed along these lines: In early 1951 Kelly informed a member of
our staff in Athens that he had been contacted by a French Vice Consul
in Salonica with a view to obtaining his, Kelly's services, for the
French. We informed Kelly that he could contime his contacts with the
Vice Consul until it could be determined what the Franch had in mind.
Upon our ascertaining that Kelly's connection with the French was counter
to 0. S. interests, Kelly was instructed to break off all contacts. This
he failed to do. In the meantime, a former Kelly man, who had become
disillusioned with Kelly's misrepresentations, informed us that Kelly
had agreed to give the French complete information on U. S. plans for
operations against Bulgaria for the sum of 16,000,000 drachmae. ALL
subsequent information on this transaction which our Athens station was
able to learn corroborates the veracity of the account.
6. Although the extent of Kelly's knowledge of operations was
limited, it was considered extremely undesirable to allow these facts
to fall inte French hands. Arrangements were therefore made with Greek
authorities for Kelly's arrest just prior to his scheduled meeting with
the French representative to whom he was to deliver the information and
from whom he was to receive the money. In view of these facts, it was
immediately apparent that Kelly was of no further operational use and
presented a definite security threat, for he was revealed as the type
who, in order to reap personal advantage or to curry favor with potential
supporters, was likely to reveal to the highest bidder whatever operational
information he had gathered. There have been no later developments
which have changed our position in the matter.
7. Information concerning subsequent developments in the handling
of this disposal case are already known to your division.
Enclosure
SE/PC/2-LT-11
Distribution: Addressee -Orig & 1
SE/PC - 2 SD/RE
-
2
GRATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Deputy forPolicy Coordination, SE
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_112.jpeg ---
13-00000
(
.....
(2)
.
Tuesday.
We do not know what was said, but from a source whom we have no reason
to doubt, (an ex-friend of Kelly's who deserted Kelly and came to us to
warn us of ex the situation with the French ) we learned that for a sum
amounting to 16,000,000 drachmae, Kelly had agreed to give the French the
names of all the American staffinvolved in plans to infiltrate Bulgaria,
plus information on Radio Suria Gorianin. Kelly was immediately
picked up by the Greek Alien Directorate, acting upon orders from Henry
McLean.
4. Reaction of Others to Kelly
(a) The Senior Representative of OPC in Athens, Sept. 1951
"
"Kelly was a notoriously insecure, disreputable, opportunisticku
individual over whom control, other than physical, was next to impossible
to exercise.....He had a positive genius for troubke-making intrigue,
rare even in this part of the world; his continued presence in Greece
would have rendered impossible any oiling of the stormy Bulgarian refugee
waters here. Kelly was tied in even more closely than other Bulgarian
agents with the Embassy here,,., and could be counted on to use that fact,
a matter of common knowledge in the Bulgarian colony, to
his own advantage and to the disadvantage of the best interests of
Government policy."
(b) Chief of Station, OPC in Athens, May 1951
"Kelly, unfortunately, is of an essentially irresponsible Irish
nature. Moreover, in his stupidity, he conceives all others to be equally
stupid. Early in our relations with Kelly,... we foresaw the need to curb
Kelly or to eliminate him from our operations. Since, however, he was
still necessary to us, we tried to use him, restraining him and teaching
him the while. Kelly, unfortunately, did not learn- he got worse. He
'borrowed' and stole money from many sources. he lied to many people,
including us, and he developed an infantile megalomania in which he per-
sisted in considering hömself the forthcoming Minister-President of
Bulgaria. "hings took a serious turn when Kelly's committee, men he himself
had chosen, came to us behind his back complaining about him. This became
more serious when Kelly's closest friend,... deserted Kekky and came to
us apparently in an honest desire to safeguard America and the struggle
against Communisn from further involvement with a character as shady as
Kelly. Since that time we have kunked examined more closely into the
Kekly affair and have found more lies, more secret agreements, more stolen
funds... We have enough proof of Entrustworthiness to have a complete case
against Kelly. We cannot continue with Kelly. He is finished.”
5. Kelly's Relation with his Wife
6DEC 1951 (a) F
rom Chief of Station, Panama; "...it was learned through inter-
rogation that Kelly has no particular concern or love for his wife."
7 Nov 1951 (b) From a letter written by Kekly to his wife; "...I think of you
daily and know in detail how you are getting along. I believe you under-
stand this both by the money and by all that you are receiving, when you
want it. It is I that arranged all that. "
(c)

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_114.jpeg ---
13-00000
>
7
i
C
SECRET
MEMORANDUM
TO:
FROM:
Gerald I. Manfield
Terence U. Nasmith
SUBJECT:
Lyle O. Kelly
18 May 1951.
It occurs to me, lying happily upon my hepatitic bed as I am, that
some sort of a statement regarding the "demise" of Lyle 0. Kelly might
be in order "for the record". I shall discuss two aspects of Kelly in
this memorandum, apologizing in advance for the vagueness of the dis-
cussion which is due, I shall maintain, to my present horizontal position
far from records, calendars and the recollectionful clink of the Ismailic
gold pound.
1.
The good of Lyle 0. Kelly.
In the summer of 1950 QKStair was in the ridiculous position of
being unable to do anything because the alien support on which it de-
pended, allegedly forthcoming from the reverend Dr. Glantz, was not
forthcoming. In a bit of a tizzy, anxious to get cracking, we picked
up Lyle 0. Kelly. We suspected at the time that he was not the new
"white hope", but we needed someone through whom we could obtain bodies.
We obtained bodies through Kelly and actually have accomplished some
substantive work. Thus it must be remembered that Kelly performed a
useful service for us.
2.
-
The bad of Lyle 0. Kelly.
Kelly, unfortunately, is of an essentially irresponsible
Irish nature. Moreover, in his stupidity, he conceives all others to
be equally stupid. Early in our relations with Kelly, before I left
LCDrink in October, we foresaw the need to curb Kelly or to eliminate
him from our operations. Since, however, he was still necessary to us,
we tried to use him, restraining him and teaching him the while.
Kelly, unfortunately, did not learn - he got worse. He "bor-
rowed" and stole money from many sources. He lied to many people, in-
cluding us, and he developed an infantile megalomania in which he per-
sisted in considering himself the forthcoming Minister-President of
Dreamland.
'
SEGRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_12.jpeg ---
13
1 November 1950 .
DIMITROV again visited the Lavrion Camp to inform his recruitsthat they
would shortly be moved to a pleasant hime in Athens which the Americans
were repainting for the purpose. On the occasion of this visit, the re-
cruits were divided into three groups, as follows:
a groupd of 10 men to specialize in intelligence;
a group of 6 men to be trained in radio in Germany
a.
b.
C.
a group of 15 men to specialize in sabotage.
The source of the information contained in the SODB 31992 described
DIMITROV as"an unprincipaled opportunist and Greek agent".
SODB 31992, 14.12.50

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_116.jpeg ---
13-00000
CE
SECRET
-
3
C
I repeat, however, that at certain juncture in our efforts,
.
Kelly represented the first and only alien body we had and, however un-
wittingly and briefly, served his country well. One hopes he will
eventually come out of his present habitat with somewhat stronger moral
fiber.
SEGRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_115.jpeg ---
13-00000
CE
SECRET
C C
2-
Things took a serious turn when Kelly's committee, men he
himself had chosen, came to us behind his back complaining about him.
This became more serious when his "closest" friend, a Flake, the man
who had actually written the books for which Kelly took credit, de-
serted Kelly and came to us apparently in an honest desire to safe-
guard America and the struggle against Communism from further involve-
ment with a character as shady as Kelly.
"
The most serious matter, one which could not be ignored, in-
volved Kelly's relations with the HBFairies. Kelly had advised us that
a Fairy Vice Consul from Salonica had contacted him with regard to work-
ing together. We told Kelly he might go ahead and continue his relations
with this gentleman until we learned exactly what the gentleman wanted.
We learned what was wanted and advised Kelly he was not repeat not to see
the Fairy agent, or any other Fairies, after a certain Thursday. We know
definitely that Kelly did see this Fairy on the following Friday, Satur-
day, and Tuesday.
We do not know what he discussed with the Fairy but we have no
reason to doubt the word of his Flake friend which is essentially as
follows:
That the Fairies were interested primarily in the
names and numbers of all the players (us, that is) in
plans for infiltration of Dreamland, in information on
Radio Gorianin, etc.; that Kelly had agreed to sell
this information to the Fairies for a sum of 16,000,000
drachmae and that he had an appointment to complete the
transaction at 11 o'clock the following morning.
.
On this information we had Kelly picked up, and are now troubled with
the question of disposing of him.
Since that time we have examined more closely into the Kelly
affair and have found more lies, more secret agreements, more stolen
funds, more of that good, Irish whimsicality for which Kelly is already
so famous. (Note that even if the hearsay evidence regarding the sell-
out to the Fairies is erroneous · although it is backed by several in-
->
-
dependent bits of substantial evidence we still have enough proof of
untrustworthiness to have a complete case against Kelly.) We cannot
continue with Kelly. He is finished.
-
(It is pertinent to note that Kelly's committee, and his party
in general, feel no feeling of loss since his removal from active politics.
Not a single person has asked about him except his wife whome he con-
tinuously disowned who wanted only to know how she might get in touch
with him to ask him for some money. The committee and refugees in
LCFlake in general, are in much better spirits than they have ever been
before. Kelly's removal is in every way a tonic.)
-
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_118.jpeg ---
13-00000
C
SECRET
Wash 38789 (OUT 97616) dated 21 April 1951 stated that
there were no facilities in the United States or Germany for han-
dling Dimitrov and pointed out that temporary disposal for three
months would be insufficient in view of Dimitrov's detailed
knowledge of the names of present agents and his general famil-
iarity with QKSTAIR infiltration operations. It was suggested
that the possibility of indefinite confinement by the Greek In-
telligence Service should be explored.
:
d. Fran 2910 (IN 36297) dated 21 April 1951 confirmed that
there were no facilities in Germany for holding Dimitrov and sug-
gested that he be assassinated.
Athe 5205 (IN 37092) dated 25 April 1951 requested further
investigation of disposal facilities.
f. Athe 5282 (IN 37839) indicated on 29 April 1951 that
Dimitrov had been transferred from the Greek Aliens Directorate
to Makronisis where he would be held by the Greek Intelligence
Service.
EE 1/CFA/auh
SECRET
-
2
CHARLESUADAMSON

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_117.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
S
_
9 May 1951
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Development of the Rift with DIMITRI A. DIMITROV
1. Biography: (See 104 CAGWU, dated 4 October 1950) Born 7 May
1924 in Medkovets, Bulgaria. Education-studied philology for one year
at Sofia University, 1942-43. In 1942 joined secret branch of the
Bulgarian National Agrarian Union. Claims to have begun underground,
anti-Fascist activities in 1943 in Macedonia and to have worked closely
with Dr. G. M. Dimitrov during this time. After emerging briefly from
hiding in September 1944, he again went underground engaging in anti-
Communist activities, touring various cities and towns, (including
sections of Yugoslav/Macedonia) and urging members of the Agrarian party
to take positive action against the Communists. In October, 1946, he
was arrested by the police. He believes the reason he was not executed
was that the Communists wished to use him as witness against Nikola
Petkov. On 23 July 1947 he escaped to Greece.
2. Initial operation: (See Athe 3200 (IN 46672), 25 October 1950)
In October, 1950, the QKSTAIR Field Chief learned of Dimitrov through
the local peripheral reporting officer and contacted him covertly.
Dimitrov made six agents immediately available for infiltration operations.
Three of these six were successfully infiltrated on 10 December, carrying
leaflets signed in the name of the Bulgarian Democratic Bloc, the emigre
political group organized and headed by Dimitrov.
3. Subsequent activities: Dimitrov has supplied an additional 21
agents for QKSTAIR infiltration operations, 15 of whom have just com-
pleted training in Germany and are being prepared for infiltration by
mid-May..
4. Origins of OKSTAIR break with Dimitrov:
.
a. In Athe 4821, IN 30224, Manfield reported on 22 March that
he was considering breaking off association with Dimitrov because
he had become too unpopular and dictatorial and self-important.
There were also indications of serious misappropriation of funds.
Manfield felt that Dimitrov's group could continue to be utilized
under the leadership of Ivan Donev Ivanov.
b. In Athe 5150 (IN 36130) dated 20 April 1951, Manfield
cabled that he had had the Greek Aliens Directorate pick up Dimitrov
and put him under protective arrest for the reasons indicated above
and because Dimitrov was about to sell out to the French. (This
was discovered through an OPC penetration of Dimitrov's organization. )
He also requested instructions on how to dispose of Dimitrov for
a period of three months, which he felt was sufficient time in
which to render him harmless to QKSTAIR operations.
SECRET
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_122.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY
WASHINGTON
March 19, 1957
Dear Mr. Dimitroff:
Your recent letter to President Eisenhower, outlining
film you propose to make, has been referred to this Agency.
Officers of the Motion Picture Service have read your
proposal, and feel that the film "Under the Communist Whip",
as you described it, would require the spectacular and dra-
matic skills and talents of one of the major studios which
could build into the film the drama and emotional appeal
needed in a first-class theatrical feature. This film would
demand treatment and re-enactment beyond the scope of the
documentary films we produce for use in our overseas informa-
tion program.
We have read with interest the material you submitted,
and we wish you success in your project.
Sincerely yours,
Shelton
Turner B. Shelton
Director
Motion Picture Service
Mr. Dim. Ad. Dimitroff
29-19 - 37th Avenue
Astoria, Long Island, New York
Is m
'D BE

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_121.jpeg ---
13-00000
Free Europe Committee, Inc.
TWO PARK AVENUE
NEW YORK 16, N.Y.
CABLE ADDRESS: NATFECOMM
TELEPHONE: LExington 2–8902
April 12, 1957
Dear Mr. Dimitroff:
I was most pleased to meet you and to learn of
your aspirations to bring into being an Anti-Communist
moving picture for use throughout the world.
From what you told me of the scope of this project,
I must concur with the opinion given by the head of the
Motion Picture Section of the U.S. Information Agency.
This is a matter for a major studio.
Accordingly, I would suggest first that you prepare
a one-page resume of your professional qualifications;
second that you prepare in English a brief resume of your
proposed film; third that you mail these for consideration
to the heads of major motion picture studios, such as,
Metro-Goldwyn Mayer, Paramount and 20th Century Fox.
success.
Please accept all of our best wishes for your
Sincerely yours,
Statson & Holm
Stetson S. Holmes
SSH: cf
Mr. Dimiter A. Dimitroff
9 Hillside Avenue,
Newark, New Jersey

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_119.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
14 by 1957
RANDIS FOR: Cale
SUBJECT
Source Lead. Dimiter Admov DUTTER
DUXITRO
R- 4928
7
1. We have been informed by the Department of State
that Dimitur Adamov DIMITROV (aka DIKO) is presently in
Washington, at the tourist home of Hrs. Julia Rogers
Smith, 2036 P Street, 1. V. Ma visit to Mashington is
for the purpose of interesting any u. 8. Goverment agency
in
a feature-length film seript that he has written. Both
USIA and the State Department, the latter due to both lack
of funds and not within its i responsibility, have refused
Dinitrow's offer. Previously, the script was rejected by
New York representatives of commercial filming companies.
2. Dimitrov allegedly headed partisan
Bulgaria and worked for American operational services
during World War II, and claims to have known General Clark,
head of the litery Masion in Sophis. He escaped to Cresce
in 1947 and continued his contact with the American opera
tional services, carrying out "anti-Communist work"
came to the II. S. with the aid of the Queen of Greece and
now lives in Newark with his wife and seven year old child
Be is approximately 32 years old.
30
above is passed to you for your information.
While State Department has not seen the film script, they
will attempt to borrow it if you so desire, Minitrov may
also be able to provide information of intelligence interest.
We should appreciate your comments as soon as possible in
order that State Department not be delayed in discontiming
contact with Dimitrov.
*
SECRET
☐
45145
COPY
201
33

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_126.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
CANCELLATION TO DIVISION
TO
Chief SE/2
ATTENTION: Hemovich
FROM
FI/STC/SPB
SUBJECT
Lyle O. Kelly
Date 28 July 1953
1. The action checked below concerning Subject of this memorandum is
hereby cancelled:
a.
Operational Clearance Nor dated 13 March 1951
Provisional Operational Clearance No.
Covert Security Clearance dated
d.
Covert Name Check dated
e.
Other
2.
This cancellation action is taken because of:
8. Memorandum dated 28 March 1953
b. Termination of Project
Removal of Subject from Project.
d.
Other
3.
.
Before Subject can be used operationally in the future, it will be
necessary to furnish an up-to-date clearance request to STC/SPB.
INITIALS
JWA/mh
FORM NO.
MAR 1953
SECRET
59-62
201-45145
(0)

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_120.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Any questions pertaining to this information na
be referred to fr. William Hopkins on
xtension 8641.
RQM/OIS/MEHopkins/Ims
Distribution:
Orig & 1
Addressee
RI/AN
OIS
SECRET
// Tenaysan LE
MIRARD 3 CAR
Chief, FOM/QI
45145
3-20
201-30
201-45147

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_123.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
COPY
Senior Representative, Athens
Raymond M. Wormer & Alan H. Medhurst
N.
ATT
AC/SE
Reference:
SGAT-3830
28.1.54
THROW OFF BGCONVOY
Contact Report (THROWOFF/3, Lyle 0. Kelly, GOHAVEN)
DIR 33889
1 Purpose of contact:
On 8 January 1954, James P. Entler arrived in DIRABALO to contact
Subjects. The primary purpose of the contact was to persuade Subjects to sign
the Syros agreement which would result in their being confined to Syros under
complete Greek custody and jurisdiction.
TERONOFF/3:
THRONOFF/3 was contacted on 8 and 9 January and related to Entler what
had developed since they last saw each other in Athens in September 1952.
During the course of the discussion the following pertinent comments were
made by THRONOFF/38
1. An unidentified Greek Gendarmerie officer told him that
KUBARK and not the Greek authorities were preventing his marriage
11. He was sent to DTRABALO primarily for security reasons
111. He resisted efforts to teach him Spanish and a trade
because he believed that he could not be helped by it, but he did request
that he be taught to drive a vehicle.
iv. He was accused of threatening a fellow refugee with.
knife (he denies this) and as a result was confined for six months.
He did not resist emigration nor did he insist on being
returned to Greece, but he did seek to be united with his fiance,
vi. He will not resist emigration from Greece unless his
staying in Greece would enable him to marry.
C.M.Freer,AC/SE
THROW OFF/3
G.English,SE/ACHI
SE/2
WH/3
FI/RON
SECRET
21 45143

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_124.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
SECRET
COPY
SCAN-3830
b. THROWOFF/3 was set right on point (1a) above and the conditions of
the Syros agreement convinced him that he was mistaken. Realizing that no
other course of action was open to him, THROW OFF/3 reluctantly signed the
agreement
THRONOFF/3 told by Entlar that this office has no objections
his resuming contact with, or marrying, his flance, but that such action would
require the approval of the Greek authorities,
3. Lyle 0. Kellys
"
Kelly was contacted on 8 Jammary and again on 9 Jamary at his request.
Immediately after meeting Kally on 8 January he made some remark that Entler
and those who knew him would probably be working for him at some future date.
However, when informed that he was being sent to Syros, he settled down and
was most attentive. The following is a list of questions raised by Kelly
and the answers given to hims
'
Would he be permitted to have his wife and child with him
Syrea? Ans That action would have to be arranged with the Greek
authorities.
11. That will prevent the Greek authorities from imprisoning him
as soon as he arrived in Greece? Ans. The terms of the agreement
specify that he will remain at Syros awaiting emigration mless he is
involved in an action which is punishable under Greek law.
111. Does the Greek government have any Jurisdiction over him at
the present time which necessitates his being returned to Greece? No
direct answer to this question was given, but Kelly was told that it was
necessary to return him to Greece under the conditions of the Syros agreement
(At this point Kelly made a statement to his DTRABALO case officer which
indicated that he believed his marriage to a Greek woman gave the Greek
authorities jurisdiction over him.)
iv Is this office throwing him out completely or would they, in
the event of
some emergency, contact him in the future? Ans. This
office will always keep a check on anyone who has ever had connections with it.
b. Kelly Indicated that he was anxious to discover whether the Americans
the Greeks were responsible for his being placed in confinement in Greece:
in 1951, and the crime he was supposed to have committed; he would raise this
question should he meet any Americans (presumably from this office) while he
is in Greene.
Greece. Entler told Kelly that he was not fandliar with this aspect of
his case, but that in his opinion Kelly would be in prison now if he had
committed a serious crime. Kelly was also told that he will serve no useful
purpose by raising this question at a future date and he agreed to forget
the matter
Several times during the two contacts with Kelly he asked that Entler
give Kelly's best regards to all who know him and to mention that he would
never forget them.
ECRET
GOHAVEN

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_13.jpeg ---
During this period of time, DIMITROV was the principal agent
in an ill-fated operation which resulted in a major expose and
trial in Sofia during 1951. The agents used were those selec-
ted by DIMITROV, at least one of whom was pot probably an
operative of the Bulgarian Militia and acted as the betrayer
of his colleagues.
hofb
Smidy roy
BLA
spromp PZ

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_127.jpeg ---
13-00000
STANDARD,FORM NO. 64'
SECRET
Security Information
Office Memorandum
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO
Chief, Foreign Intelligence
FROM
: Acting Chief, SE
DATE: 21 July 1953
SUBJECT: Lyle O. KELLY
1. As a result of discussions between WHD, SE, CFI, and DD/A, it was
decided to send an SE representative to DTROBALO to interview Lyle O. KELLY
for the purpose of determining whether he represented sufficient security hazard
to current SE operations out of Greece to warrant his being retained in maximum
detention.
2. In accordance with this agreement, Major Michael A. Hemovich was sent
to DTROBALO where he arrived at noon on 26 May 1953.
3. Major Hemovich discussed the case with the case officers concerned
at DTROBALO, and then spent twelve hours talking to KELLY. As a result of
this, it has been ascertained to our satisfaction that KELLY does not appear to
have information of sufficient currency regarding staff or agent personnel, or
current operations, in Greece to make his resettlement within the course of the
next twelve months a serious security risk.
-
4. We therefore recommend that Lyle O. KELLY be given whatever training
in language and trade WH Division feels is required, and that efforts then be
made to resettle him in South America. Our only request is that this Division
be kept informed of the progress of this rehabilitation and be advised of the
steps taken to resettle KELLY. In this connection it should be pointed out
that KELLY has a wife and child in Greece. When queried by Major Hemovich
about them, he professed no interest in having the wife or child join him,
stating that he would like to provide some money for the support of the child
if and when he got a job and could put aside some money for this purpose. It
is therefore our intention to have KELLY write his wife a letter telling her
that he has no further interest in her, that she should obtain a divorce, but
that he will provide her with a certain sum of money for the child. (This sum
will be provided by this Division and will probably be in the neighborhood of
$1000).
5. Major Hemovich's report is attached herewith.
Jime
SE/2-DFEwing-lf
Distribution:
Addressee - Orig & 1
->
1
1
:
WHD
DD/A
AC/SE
1
SE/2
2
SECRET
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_128.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Dimitri Adamoff DIMITROV
6 December 1961
2
file
201-45145
written by CI/RHA
(Don Piatt)
1. Subject was born on 7 May 1924 in Medkavets,”
Bulgaria. He studied philology for one year at Sofla University
from 1942-1943. During the war he worked illegally in Greok
Macedonia and Vardar, Macedonia to escape authorities. He
returned home after the war; he was soon disillusioned by the
Communists, and went to Sofia. Later he made a clandestine
tour of Bulgarian towns and cities urging agrarians to take posi-
tiva action against communism. Finally captured in Sofia, he
stated that his life was spared because he was groomed as a
witness against PETKOV. He escaped to Greess in 1947. Hi
He =
worked for the Grooks doing occasional propaganda under
plume "Dike."
2. In 1950, the American Embassy in Athens eval-
uated Subject as having a very great deal of the charlatan about
him, and was considered a "phony." However, notwithstanding
his superficiality and the exaggeration to which he was prone,
Subject had an intuitive grasp of the rudiments of political deport-
ment and showmanship and he was so devoted to his self-appointed.
task of organizing his "democratic block" that it was thought that
he might become an important Bulgarian figure.
3. In November, 1950, because of his background and
experience, Subject was considered ag an individual who could
make significant psychological and political warfare contributions
to operations in Greece. Subject was then very activa among
Bulgarian refugees in Greece. Early in October, 1950, he visited
the Lavrion Camp where he spoke to the Bulgarian refugees and
outlined the tasks that he was to assume, which included intelli-
gence activities in Bulgaria, organizing an underground resistance
movement in Bulgaria, and organizing sabotage activity against
Bulgaria. Subject was not security conscious; he revealed the
location of his office and told his listeners that his office had two
Bulgarian typewriters and that he had a car with United States
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_125.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
COPY
SGAN 3830
GOHAVENS
GOBAVEN was contacted only once on 9 January. He
told that,
recognition for his past services and his excellent behavior at DIRABALO
those concerned with his case were making an effort to obtain his entry
during the
the United States or the US Army. He was reminded several times into
discussion that this effort may not be successful. He was also told that
His transfer from DIRABALO was necessary in the very near future and in the
event that his entry into the United States the U.S. Army was still pending
he would be moved to Syros. He was told that his transfer to Syros would be
certain in the event that he was not permitted to enter the United States oz
the US Army At this point he was asked to sign the Syros agreement; he
refused stating that he could not sign any agreement which indicated a
voluntary severance of relations with the Americans. However, GOHAVEN added
that he would not resist his transfer to Greece should the Americans desire
to send him there. He pointed out that living conditions at Syros
that his health would certainly deteriorate and, being a Bulgarian, he could
are such
not look forward to fair treatment at the hands of the Greeks.
b. CCHAVEN was instructed not to reveal to anyone what took place during
the discussion and was told that he would without question be sent to Syros, if
he violated these instructions. He stated that he would followinstructions
and would gladly sign a statement to that effect
**
Athenst 3 w/attachment under separate cover
(2 copies Syros agreement in Greek,
1 copy Syros agreement in English)
SR-1/GStevens/672/acf/13 Jan
Dists RI
EX/SE
CHRISTIAN M. FREER
Acting Chief SE
SE-1
SE-2
FI/ROM
WR/3
SECRET
GRET
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_129.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
-2-
license plates. In April, 1951, Subject was in contact with the
French Vice-Consul and his wife, a French diplomat stationed in
Athens, an elderly Greek who worked and otherwise had close
connections with the French, and other Greek personalities. In
April, 1951, besides his wife he had several other bed partners.
Because of the operational security violations which had arisen,
it was recommended urgently that Subject be removed from cir-
culation.
Observers in Athens considered Subject to be too
dictatorial and self-important and if he was not actually insane, he
appeared to be suffering from delusions of grandeur. For instance,
he made references to his future role as prime minister of Bulgaria.
Because of Subject's neurotic, unstable character, it was deemed
advisable to transfer Subject to Panama. Subject was taken to
Panama on 6 September 1951 and was considered as a neuro-psychiatric
case. On 9 October 1951, he began a hunger strike at midnight and
did not break the fast until 9 a. m. on 14 October 1951. He asked that
his former secretary in the Partisan Movement, who was located:
somewhere in Bulgaria, he brought to Panama. The doctors' con
cera, particularly the neuro-psychiatrist, indicated that they could
net treat Subject adequately.
5. In February, 1954, Subject was returned to Greece.
Prior to his return to Greece, Subject signed an agreement which
would have resulted in his confinement to Syros under complete
Greek custody and jurisdiction. (Attachment A)
6. In October, 1955, Subject sought admission to the
United States under the Refugee Relief Program. Because years
had passed since he had been in operational contact with Bulgarian
refugees, it was felt that Subject should not be prevented from enter-
ing the United States.
7.
Since entering the United States, Subject has been
a continual source of embarassment. His megalomania is evident
in the various communications with government agencies. For
example, he recently commented in one letter that he would like
to be appointed Richard Nixon's anti-communist adviser for Albania,
Yugoslavia, Macedonia, Rumania, and Bulgaria. He stated that he
could liberate all these countries within five years if he were allowed
SECHE

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_131.jpeg ---
13-00000
STANDARD FORM NO. 64
Office Memorandum
TO
:
FILE
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
☐
FROM : ACTING CHIEF, RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS BRANCH
SUBJECT: DEMITER ADAMOFF DIMITROFF
#46165
DATE: 20 Nov 1961
THE ACTING DIRECTOR OF SECURITY ASKED THAT THIS FILE BE DOCU-
MENTED TO REFLECT THE FOLLOWING:
Fred BLUMENTHAL OF Parade Magazine CALLED MR. GROGAN, ASSIS-
TANT TO THE DCI, THIS DATE AND STAted that SuBJECT HAD BEEN IN
CONTACT WITH him with an ˜ANTI-CIA STORY. DIMITROFF WAS IDENTI
FIED BY FULL NAME AND BIRTH DATA. HE CLAIMED THAT HIS CODE NAME
Was "Diko", THAT HE WAS A MOVIE DIRECTOR AND SCRIPT WRITER AND
THAT HE HAD BEEN CONNECTED WITH THE UNDERGROUND IN EUROPE. HE
CLAIMED, ACCORDING TO BLUMENTHAL, THAT CIA TOOK HIM TO PANAMA,
HAND CUFFED HIM AND HELD HIM IN CAPTIVITY.
MR. BANNERMAN reviewed DIMITROFF'S FILE AND ADVISED MR.
GROGAN OF THE BACKGROUND IN THIS CASE. MR. GROGAN WAS ADVISED
THAT DIMITROFF IS NOT NOW CONNECTED WITH CIA; THAT HE HAS HAD
PSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS, TRIED TO GET MONEY FROM FORMER VICE PRESI –
DENT NIXON TO FINISH A BOOK, MADE WILD CLAIMS ABOUT CIAS TREAT-
MENT OF HIM AND HAS, IN GENERAL, EXHIBITED AN ERRATIC BEHAVIOR
PATTERN, CHARACTERIZING HIM AS UNRELIABLE AND UNTRUSTWORTHY.
DAVID H. WOLDORF
t

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_133.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
CC
5. Dimitr
croff's
's real aim is to recruit five thousand supporters
fighting aga. These vould be used to invade Bulgaria by air drop into
the southern mountain tier shout April 1962. They would easily seize the
cities of that area, which are held by mere hundreds of police and communist
officials. The attacks would be at night and in sufficient strength to
surprise and overwhelm the opposition. Proclamations would be issued,
prisonars released, recruiting carried out and a border area set up in
mountains with the passes heavily defended. He said there are only four
major roads into this southern area, so that it could be quickly and
quickly and effectively
sealed off. The United Nations would be called to intervene immediate
it has done in Korea and the Congo.
6. This enclave in Bulgaris would be the start of the overthrow of
the commmist goverment in that country. When this is achieved, Fimitroff
said he would want only five years as the head of the state to establish
true democracy on the Whited States order. Thereafter, he would be happy
to retire, having fulfilled his promise to his followers that he would
never give up the fight, He said that he was willing to die for the
of a free Bulgaria and hopes that he make it the fifty-first
the United States.
te
7. To these ends he wrote a letter on 15 June 1961 to President
Kennedy (copy attached). When he did not receive a reply, he called
personally and was referred by a secretary to the State Department and
then to cui Dimitroff needs funds and support from CIA and commented
that if the Agency does not decide to support him in his anti-comamist
work, he will try to cover the names of the US citizens responsible for
wrecking his underground activities and for holding him prisoner for thre:
years. This, he said, he owed to his supporters because he has been
to do nothing without support.
able
8. Belatedly, he mentioned that he had written one of the greatest
motion picture scripts ever. It is fictional but based on complete truths
and is very strongly anti-commmunist. Unfortunately, he cannot find finanedal
backers and could use CIA money if his major project cannot be immediately
adopted. The title of the piece is "One Dark Night"
9. Dimitroff was informed that his visit and comments would be passed
to any interested officials, and he would be contacted should there be any
need to do so. He insisted, however, that he would remain in Washington
for a reasonable time awaiting an answer and will definitaly try to open
other doors than those of CIA. He is using a letter drop and answering
service -> 422 Washington Building, DC5, ST 3-9474, in the pseudonym af
Dimitriou…. In the future he can always be reached through another
Dimo Petroff at 67 Richmond Street West, Suite 304, Toronto I, Ontario,
Canada.
F. J. Sheridan
Enclosure: as noted
97-14977
ECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_132.jpeg ---
13-00000
SCRET..
To: Chief, Contact, Division
Atta: Support Branch (Crowley)
from Chief, Washington office
Subject: D
Dimiter Adamoff Dimitraff
("Diko")
12 October 1961
00-A-3198985
Renewed Effort for CIA Support
1. Mr. Hill of the ECI Security Office called Sheridan ce
29 September 1961 to state that a Dimiter Dinitroff was trying to
meet the DCI, and Mr. Bricker falt ha should be handled by the
Washington Field Office. Hill was told that Dimitroff had been
interviewed at length in the Washington Field Office on 28 June
1960 after effort to see Vice President Nixon (00-AS 3,161,567
under Case
Sheridan suggested that Hill tell Dimitroff
that his story was matter of record, and there would be no
purpose in further interview unless he had something new to
contribut
ate.
for 2 October 1961
2. Nonetheless, an appointment was
the Washington Field Office. Dimitroff was obviously disappointe
to be sent back to Sheridan and admitted that he had been trying
to find mother entre to the Agency for his proposals. He pointed
out that he was still against the Democratic Party but was in favor
of President Kennedy because of his strong unti-communist stand,
and had been encouraged to resume his efforts by the president's
appeals against communism
3. TH off stated that he can keep his country of Bul
Bulga
Albania, Macedonia, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Poland in a
turmoil against the USSR if given authority and backing by the CT
En reiterated that he had been the youngest underground leader and
was imprisoned by US elbizens in the jungle for three years for
contiming his fight. Although his former contacts are now ten
years old, he is sure that they can be re-established and that his
former comrades vill rally to him in an active movement against
the commmists, rather than to continue in passive roles.
4. His latest plan is to form a Liberation Committee vith
himself as president. It would publish a Bulgarian/English paper
for world distribution to Bulgarian enigres in an effort to alert
supporters. The tone would be cultural rather then openly political.
He would also establish a central point to help Bulgarian refugees.
With this under way, Dimitroff said that ninety percent of Georgi
Dimitrow's (Bulgarian National Committee) followers would defect
to him. He said that Dimitrov is on the United States payroll
and had called´him a traitor to Bulgaria last week.
SECRET
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_130.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
-3-
to work actively with financial support. His first objective would
be to liberate Bulgaria, his homeland, make it a free democracy.
and the 51st state of the United States...
8. More details on Subject's thinking, attitude, mega-
fomanía, and background can be found in the following attachments:
A. Certificate of Understanding.
B. Interview with Dimiter DIMITROFF, 28 Juns 1960.
C. Informal Memorandum from EE/BR. 1 July 1960.
D. 00 Contact Report, 12 October 1961.
E.
Memorandum for the Record, 17 November 1961.
Attachmentsi
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_136.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
10. As the result of the review of Subject's case, it is recommended
that nothing further be done for him since he does not possess any damaging
information concerning current operations and his memory of past operations
and personalities is between nine and ten years old…. (In view of the circum-
stances of termination, it should be pointed out to Subject that in pressing
the United States Government for further assistance he is liable for prosecu
tion under the espionage and secrecy laws of the United States Government, }
Attachment Certification
understanding

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_135.jpeg ---
13-00000
7. With termination of the holding facility at Fort Clayton, Subject
was temporarily removed to Greece since there were no other immediate
possibilities to resettle him. (The attached understanding with Subject
was effected o/a 12 January 1954 at the time of his removal from Fort
Clayton.) CIA made a commitment to the Greek authorities that CIA.
would not abandon Subject in Greece and would take steps to remove him
from Greek soil within one year. Efforts were made to effect Subject's
migration to Canada, New Zealand, Australia and elsewhere, but to no
avail, · After due consideration by interested headquarters elements and
the Athens Station, it was decided that the best effective solution for
Subject's disposal would be to let him immigrate to the United States on
his own under the Refugee Relief Act program, but without any assistance
from CIA.
3. Since arrival in the United States, Subject has come to our attention
on the following occasion:
On 14 May 1957, the Department of State informed CIA that
Subject had contacted their office and tried to interest them in
purchasing a feature length film script. At that time Subject told
the Department of State that he was living in Newark, New Jersey,
with his wife and seven-year-old daughter and was in Washington
on a visit. The State Department had no interest in the film script
and asked if members of this Agency would like to meet Subject and
discuss the script. This offer was turned down. The case officer
involved understood that State Department then discontinued all
contact with Subject. There is no further information available.
"
9. Although he was considered to be of operational value at the time he
was originally picked up by elements of CIA, Subject's subsequent actions,
lack of integrity and poor security indicated that he was unworthy of any
further operational consideration. He has a tendency to exaggerate to the
point of lying and become involved in deals of which he was the financial
benefactor. Throughout all his deals, however, there is the thread of alleged
national pride and desire to project himself in the fight against Communism.
There have been reported rumors of his having been a Bulgarian IS agent
even during the time when he was employed by CIA. No concrete evidence,
however, was actually uncovered to substantiate these allegations, which
are believed to be typical of denunciations made by rival political factions
among emigres,

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_134.jpeg ---
13-00000
MEMORANDUM
6
SUBJECT: Dimitur Adamov DIMITROV aka "Diko" DIMITROV
1
July 1960
1. A review of Agency files reveals the following data concerning Subject
and his association with CIA.
2. Subject was first contacted in October 1950 by the Field Chief of OPC
activities in Athens, Greece. The purpose of this contact was to assess
Subject as a principal agent and focal point in the recruitment of Bulgarians
to participate in OPC operations directed against Bulgaria. For this purpose,
an organization called the Democratic Bloc was established, and Subject was
placed as its ostensible organizer and chief.
3. During the period October 1950 through March 1951, Subject remained
in the employ of OPC in Athens and provided 21 agents for infiltration into
Bulgaria, but he never participated in the cross-border operations.
4. In early 1951, various operational and administrative difficulties
began to manifest themselves and it was decided that Subject should be
removed from his position. In April 1951 it came to OPC's attention that
Subject intended to sell his knowledge of CIA's activities to the French
Intelligence Service. This fact was used as the primary reason for his
removal from active participation in Bulgarian operations.
.
5. Because of operational security considerations stemming from his
duplicity and personal make-up, it was deemed inadvisable to leave Subject
at large in Greece and it was decided that he should be transferred to a CIA
holding facility at Fort Clayton, Panama. He was airlifted from Athens to
Frankfurt where he was hospitalized four days for observation, and then
flown black to Fort Clayton, arriving on 4 September 1951. He remained
there until January 1954.
6. A CIA case officer was dispatched from headquarters in May 1953
to Fort Clayton where he interrogated Subject. I was determined at that
time that whatever operational knowledge Subject had of CIA, its methods,
personnel, and operations was obsolete.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_14.jpeg ---
12
ATHE 4788 (in 25602), March, 1951(?)
:
:
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_137.jpeg ---
13-00000
Att
33254
A 13
SECRET
Musulin
Sii
new.
George
you!
he hot sunt diseased
wy if they
during which
lest
SECRET
svert him in oil ways
tată

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_138.jpeg ---
13-00000
John
Rakeless
SECRET
the Enl
igurina
m
actertly
the
bo roolá
TABLE
ober
SECRET
tate

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_139.jpeg ---
13-00000
G C
year
promises of over
Before he sould met the Ambassador, Dimitroff was
betrayed at his [ safe ] house in Sofia by the landlady for one million
leva, and was arrested by the Bulgarian secret police. He was tortured
by alsatricity, physical means, water, devices, and starvation. During
this time he was regularly questioned by a Soviet Commissar bub told
nothing because he knew he was to die and had to create an example.
Finally sentenced to death by hanging, he waited daily for nine months
for it to be carried out. Later he learned he had not been executed
because the authorities wanted him to testify at the trial of Nikola Petkov
that Patkov had supported Dimitroff's movement
8. In 1947 ha vas working in a labor gang ms rescued by the
underground, which sent him to the house of the US Ambassador. Arrangements
vere måa through US persomal, over a period of two weeks, to send
Dimitroff to Greece. He vas varned not to use his name "Diko” but did
use his regular name.
The Commista offered a million leva reward for
his death espture in brochures with his picture.
9. In Greece, UK military personal recognized him from the
photographs and took him from a Greek hospital. HE General Scott:
and offered him complete support and a radio station at Balonika to
renew underground netivities. Scott was very anti-Il and for that
son Tim
Dimitroff refused the offer. The following day all uniforms
gifts given him by W personnál veze removed and he was turned back to
II
the Greeks, who employed him in radio station in Athena broadcasting
against Bulgarian Communiste
For
10. During 1948, Commmist agents were sent to Athens to kill
him.
hia reason ha vent to Italy at the suggestion of the Greak
he
Government. In 1949 while at Bari, a Mr. Clark from the US Embassy in
Greece, who knew him sa "Diko", naked Dimitroff to return to Greece and
to romaw the fight with his underground if it could be revived. At its
peak it had consisted of 250 secret posts and ten thousand active members.
They returned together to Athens and set up an open Kiberation Committes
with Dimitroff as president. The organisation truiñed Bulgarians in
Frankfurt and near Athens. Many of these were later parachuted into
Bulgaria starting in 1949. His operations were puroly military and did not
involve espionage. Another US curvice in Gresce, primrily interested in
espionage, was headed by a 1tr. Eving (sie) or thing (sis) for which all
types of Bulgarians were working for money. When Dinitroff's man •
attempted to cross the Bulgarian frontier they were sometimes ambushed
by Bring's people or were betrayed to the Bulgarian Commmmists. To
cheak personally he went on an inspection of the frontier with a US Army
representative, a Mr. George. They talked to his people who had been
forced back and George realized that Ewing was collaborating with the
✓ Commnists. George reported this to Clark who returned to Washington
with the story and never came back to Cresse.
11. Clark was replaced by Allen, of German origin, Russia
speaking, Moscow educated, and a Communist. At their first meeting,
Allen tald Dimitroff to take it easy, that there was plenty of time to
fight the Commmmmists. Thereafter it was apparent that Ering was
learning all of Rimitroff's plans, schedules, and secrets through Allen,
and Ewing's people began openly to deride Dimitroff. This killed the
SECHET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_141.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRE
thereafter Dimitroff was
to
ald
14.
met curt of
of the
hospital without any of his belongings, having been told th
were taking him to Venezuela. Actually be was taken to Colo
abandored eosub artillery building. Ho ärentered not to
escape and me left with five 15 sivilian
vilian guard When he becam
douter zerivad and gave him shots. For
for the next th
next three years ho
kept there. During this peried a series of III personal arrived from Imab-
ingkoa to see him. Finally he threatened to walk out and they could shack
him if they wished. At this,
tálá be would be taken
but at the airport
is
had
by
En vas tied and gagged
an old shall msg
ma keyk in the hole for
they would kill him
cheat
best and a douter
mutha
Finally
ught in who diagnosed that he would dis with
After
Communist
var and had
to his 14 NELL
bours if
day he fam
4 and
They
in hip
had
in the mite House
Life pansio
offers
prefered to be returned to Greven,
mitesen of clothes and took him to a
hotel
They reported to Viet
Ella
16. They
Athens. H
ha talá
new
the Etring of 1954 to
Tap the became
friendly wi
him and to
These inain
fiver of the
to the US
in Novemb
1956 wit
without danger
on of writing
ory in en i
book.
At fir
At this time he met t
in
dident Ets
to Spares Skor
had never hurt him and he
in Her Tack City, James T.
E
sesisted his
the State Repartiet and USIA being ukimtely ammered by Turnas
of USIA. Etmitruff mat Shalten in Washington to discus
possibility of moppert in filming his story but Shelton obviously
✓ off unbalanced by mummating that he would be seriph writer, pro
end
worked sa a juniter in
Gre
med to halp, sayin
oh wish to be involved. Du
involved.
whe
rt, which
Diho also met,
L who had
muggented that he we
☐ The 1stter w88 39:
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_145.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY
WASHINGTON
May 12, 1958
Dear Mr. Dimitroff:
I appreciated your thoughtful letter of May 5 relative
to the cultural agreement between the USSR and the United
States signed January 27, 1958.
As you know from talking with me, I am fully cognizant
of the problems that exist relative to the Soviet Union
and their relations with the Free World. It is, however,
because of the serious problems that we believe it is so
very necessary to reach the people of the Soviet Union by
the means of motion pictures, radio, television and other
methods of communication in order that they may have a
better understanding of the freedom and way of life which we
have the great honor and privilege to enjoy.
I assure you that everyone connected with matters relative
to the purchase and sale of American and Soviet motion pictures
is completely aware of the problems relative to these matters,
as well as to the opportunities which are presented.
Let me thank you most sincerely for your interest and
assure you that we will not fail to exercise caution and
deliberation in connection with the implementation of this
agreement.
Sincerely yours
my Shatto
Turner B. Shelton
Director
Motion Picture Service
Mr. Dim. Ad. Dimitroff
1424 S. Kenmore Avenue.
Los Angeles 6, California
1
1

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_140.jpeg ---
13-00000
to
to
SECRET
Communist and
GECRET
Sightton

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_142.jpeg ---
13-00000
C
6SECRE
hin
mo 1959 -
Estrich 7-8
SECREG

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_146.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
ETHR
General Dico Dimitrov, Bulgarian Free-
dom Fighter spoke briefly to the assem-
bly as he urged everyone to do all in
their power to overcome the evil of
Communism. Write your elected offic
ials in Washington telling them how
you feel.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_144.jpeg ---
13-00000
is
--
OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT
WASHINGTON
May 27, 1958
THIS
ID
Mr. Dim. Ad. Dimitroff
1424 S. Kenmore Avenue
Los Angeles 6, California
Dear Mr. Dimitroff:
On behalf of the Vice President I wish to ac-
knowledge your letter of May 20 concerning your plans
to fight Communism.
You may be sure that the Vice President sym-
pathizes with your desire and your firmness of purpose;
however, I must tell you that the State Department and
the United States Information Agency are the operative
agencies in this field. I can only suggest, therefore,
that as you continue to develop your ideas you keep in
touch with them so that they can give your projects
careful consideration.
I know that the Vice President would want me
to extend to you his good wishes and his appreciation
for your generous comments concerning his South Amer-
ican trip.
Șincerely,
Jr.
Q.E. Cushman,
R. E. Cushman, Jr.
Executive Assistant
to the Vice President

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_143.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
C C
for wat tra
E
SECRET
O C
7
Dimitreff adŕnd he only had
would be further end been th
ma directly
be bainful to Himm
red that
elsenly held in the fee
be andmered should
nå for 10
#f
to
is bearly
the five

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_17.jpeg ---
150
13
3 March 1951
..
DIMITROV signed a memorandum certifying that he had received three hundred
dollars from Lawrence F. MacBRIDE, literary agent, representing a sum
paid for a complete and unabridged option on the use and possible publica-
tion of three books written by me and brought to Mr. MacBRIDE, in Greek
translation, by [ ] who acted in this instance purely informally and
as a friend. The option is effective as of this date for a period of c
six calendar months.
Memorandum dated 3 March 1951 [attachment to SGAA 24772, n.d. not in
file]

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_15.jpeg ---
13-00000
23 January 1951
Chief of EE/1 requested that the attached Provisional Operational
Clearance be approved for Dimitri A. DIMITROV be approved. He is
to be used as a contract agent in Greece for political, psychological,
and guerrilla warfare operations under Project QKSTAIR.
In view of the fact that recuritment of Bulgarian
agents who are scheduled shortly to begin covert training must be
accomplished through Mr. DIMITROV, his clearance is needed immediately.
Memorandum for EAD, dated 23 January 1951.
:
1

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_16.jpeg ---
18
1
25 January 1951
Frank G. WISNER, ADPC, approved a Provisional Operational Clearance for
a period of ninety days subject to renewal if the full clearance has not
been granted.
Memorandum for EE/1, dated 25 January 1951

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_148.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
THE NATIONAL LEAGUE OF AMERICAN PENTOLEN
LOS ANGELES BRANCH
Charter No.1
Dear Penwomen,
A HAPPY NEW YEAR! Our new year of 1958 begins with our next Meeting
Tuesday, January 14th, - let's all be there. Our Program starts at 12:00-
Noon, at the Hotel Knickerbocker, 1714 Ivar Street, Hollywood, California.
A General Workshop will be conducted at 11:00 A. H.
Joe Balding will lead us in the Salute To The Flag..
Dr. Edna . Phillips, Vice President, will give the Invocation,
Ì.. Demitroff author, journalist, writer and poet, is our Guest Speaker.
We look forward with pleasure and anticipation to hearing him speak on
"The Role of the Bulgaria Writers Before and After the Communist Regime.
Mr. A. J. Burns, Educational Manager of the Western Division of the Readers'
Digest, will be presented with great pride. His subject, "Building A Better
World Through Better Reading" should strike to all our hearts as writers.
Dr. Lucia Liverette, President, with her husband, Dr. Jack Liverette,
Pastor of the Community Church of Los Angeles, will present a l'usical
Program of Accordion and Saxaphone Numbers.
Dean Callerias of St. Sophia Greek Orthodox Church is our Honor Guest.
BOARD MEETING will follow the Program.
We wish to thank our President again for the most enjoyable time as guests
in her home on December 29th.
PLEASE remember to pay 1958 Dues and help our Treasurer to start her work
in our behalf.
DR. EDNA M. PHILLIPS,
Program Chairman

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_147.jpeg ---
13-00000.
10 CITIZEN-NEWS ✰✰ Thursday, April 10, 1958
Citizen-News photo
Byram Warns
Today County
Tax Deadline
County Tax Collector Howard
Byram warned property owners)
that they must pay current tax)
bills by 5 p.m. today or be sub-
ject to penalties.,
After the deadline, delinquent
taxpayers will be charged, a set
fee of $2.50 plus six per cent of
the total due.
Byram said about 76 per cent
of the total tax charge of $63,-
000,000 ghas been collected so
far.
Property owners may pay
bills in person at the tax col-
lector's office, 840 S. Hill St.
Remittances by mail will also
he acceptable provided they are
postmarked by 5 p.m. ·
However, Byram advised citi-
zens to mail their payments at
least by noon to make sure they
[clear postoffices,
Dinner-Dance Slated
The Men's Club of the Sun-
air Foundation will hold a din-
ner-dance April 17 at the
DIKO, REFUGEE BULGARIAN ANTI-COMMUNIST Sportsmen's Lodge in North
claims Reds still peril him
GUARDS AGAINST REDS
Hollywood.
Refugee Lives in
Fear of Tormentors
By DAN SWINTON
average person's life," he says. By the Bulgarian Democratic
A square-jawed Bulgarian This story is wrapped up in Bloc, which survived from 1944)
refugee said today he is living a book Diko has written. It is to 1953.
a life of fear and flight even in based on the facts of his run- After Diko escaped from his
Los Angeles because of com- ning fight in Bulgaria with the 1946 imprisonment, he contin-
munist tyranny.
Reds; his imprisonment and ued the battle from Greece.
Diko, a panedonym that once
death sentence in 1946 after a Four attempts were made on
ignited resistance to Red betrayal; his torture by elec-his life but he kept pounding
force, said that even here he ricity at the hands of the out the fight talk in pamphlets
Reds; his forced starvation for like "Farmers and Commu-
had to guard against the venge-
.
✓ ful hand of his Old World tor-18 days; his forced thirst for tism."
mentors.
1
'
12 days; the slaughter of his In 1953, Uncle Sam offered
"They do not give up. Even parents because they bore a re-him refuge in Virginia, Sinclud-
in America the peril is great.
sistance leader.
ing a house, a car and an in-
am always in danger," he said.. He said Bulgarian resistance come, he said. But he insisted
Dika is Dimiter Adamoff was grass roots resistance. on staying with the mountain
Dimitroff, five-foot five, 140 "This was different from the people in Greece to guide the
pounds. He spells his name with revolts in Hungary and Po-attack on tyranny.
the double "[" because the Rus-land," said Diko.
.
. Fourteen months ago Diko
STILL IN HIDING
bians like to spell it with a ".""In Hungary and Poland the decided he must tell his story
He said he made one TV. ap-uprising originated among the to the West. He came to the
pearance in Hollywood. Which Communists themselves. Those U.S. as a political refugee.
was followed by a threat of among the populace who hated
physical violence, presumably the Reds joined later. But at
Red-inspired.
first it was an attempt to sel
“SPARKED UNDERGROUND up a Tito form of Nationalist
The pocket-sized, hazel-eyed Communism," Diko explained.
poet and writer once sparked| ESCAPED TO GREECE
the Bulgarian underground. His first anti-Red unit in Bul- story. Besides, I have to be
His name flamed from resist-garia was the Danube Val-careful
the Danube Val-careful about disclosing
ance pamphlets to teach Redley Organization for Resistance. whereabouts." said Diko.
puppets that the pen can be This folded for lack of outside Yankee dedication to hones-
mightier than the sword. help. It was promptly replaced ty and veracity may lose the
His mission today is to ""show
the free world how things
were. before and how they are
now and what can happen here
if the Reds take over. If they
like the picture, let them go
aheart and accept it.”
agnir.
M.
OBITUARIES
there. I have been writing m
my
cold war with Communism,
Diko warned..
"Americans have to he
tougher, rougher. They have
to learn to lie the way the
Reds lie. You can't pick up this
Rosary was recited today for Joseph snake with your hands." he
retred for Awele
JOSEPH M. GASKI
He lived al
and retired on a disability pension in
Betty Wells.
sid___
granay when he was rated wam. tomorrow at hol: He warns against the Soviet
Trinity Capitolle Cautch,
17. the village of his: 1236 Brunck Ava and led Tuesday, culture infiltration. "This is the
father to meet a challenge: the He was with the police force since 1924 biggest kind of propaganda. Let
Nazihand.
1954. He leaves his widow Brigitta: them show the prisons and the
Why the Reds took over in Belt daughters, Mary Anne and Mrs. torture camps, instead of the
Bulgar Diko stayed under-
ballets and the motion pic-
MRSTIDA Mλ MURRAY
ground.
Respriance is a Bulgarian's rev. Da, widow of Mexico and western
Requiem Mass for Mira. Ita N. Muretures," said Diko.
He hopes the message will
Jegney. For centuries the na- I GYM get through. But he admits his
tion is wrestled to escape the Catholic Church. She died Saturdayjurgings may not sail any ships.
bonds of succeeding masters, her honte. 2658 S. Hobart Blvd. She
leaves daughter. Eva A. a son. "I'm not as important as i
Those who choose to fight can!Mark and a grandchild. Interment was," says Diko. "But I'm still
fin many trails blazed. So
the same fellow."
speaks Diko.
COMMUNISM'S MEANING ·
"l'in an anti-communist. I
frel obliged to tell this story.
the story I lived. I feel it would
The a crime not to tell what
Communism means to the
was celebrated today In Holy Name
will be in Calvary Cemetery,
FUNERALS 'Miss Van Nuys'
HOLDEN--Maria Holden.
Beloved wife of Henry A.:
Holden, sister of Richard D.
and Donald R. Berry,
Services Friday, 9 a.m., at
Off to Penitentiary
Mrs. Anita' Baxter Ester-
wold, 20, attractive: former
"Miss Van Nuys,” began a five-
Glizelews
Thisday: 10.4.55
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_149.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY
WASHINGTON
July 20, 1957
Dear Mr. Dimitroff:
I very greatly appreciated your thoughtful
letter of July 17. I shall certainly take occasion
to watch the television program to which you refer
at my next opportunity.
Please accept my best wishes.
Sincerely,
Bhelton
Turner B. Shelton
Director
Motion Picture Service
Mr. Dim. Ad. Dimitroff
1236 S. Menlo Avenus
Los Angeles 6, California

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_19.jpeg ---
13-00000
22 March 1951
:
QKSTAIR reported that it was considering breaking off association with
DIMITROV because he had become too unpopular and dictatorial and self-
important. There were also indications of serious misappropriation of
funds (NB: This charge was later proven false see document)
-
;
ATHE 4821 (IN 30224), 22 March 1951

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_21.jpeg ---
13-00000
!
facility available.
g. Transportation under escort via MATS to military base Panama proposed.
NB (included at bottom of page): ADAMSON reworked cable and read draft
to HAND, CARLAN, TOD, and VILLEMETTE who approved. HAND took draft in
order to have OSO get it out today.
Note dated 8 April 1951.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_22.jpeg ---
13-00000
12 April 1951
DIMITROV told (his handler
-
CIA) that he was to tell FLORIMOND by 13
April whether he would work with him.
DIMITROV asked for instructions.
He was told that his answer was to be a definte and final no.
He was
not to see the French again.
Memorandum, dated 18 April 1951
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_23.jpeg ---
13-00000
13, 14, and 17 April 1951
DIMITROV saw FLORIMOND on Friday (13th), Saturday (14th) and on Tuesday
(17th). On the latter day he also saw a certain French assistant mili-
tary attache named PIRAY.
Memorandum, 18 April 1951
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_20.jpeg ---
13-00000
✓ April 1951
Discussions held between ADAMSON and HAND of CIA and Colonels COVERDALE,
and CARLAN, Mr. TOD, and Captain VILLEMETTE of G-2. Points (given below)
the Army wants covered in a cable to OSO in Panama.
a. Fort Clayton hospital detention war considered best possibility.
b. Has this been discussed with G-2 USACARIB? If so, does it meet
their approval? Can it be worked without advising Provost Marshal,
Washington? (so leave in G-2 channels).
C. AC of S G-2 Washington concurred in principle with proposal of
assistance to CIA in this matter.
d. As soon as operational details worked out with USACARIB, cable ad-
vising generally that can be effected forwarded by G-2 USACARIB to ACos S
G-2 (personal for BOLLING). Details will come back through CIA.
e.
Identification of KELLY (DIMITROV) case.
f. Detention period maximum of one year, relieve Army sooner if CAS

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_18.jpeg ---
1500
13 March 1951
:
Operational Clearance issued to permit the use of DIMITROV's services
as "a contractual agent in Greece engaged in political, psychological,
and guerrilla warfare operations under project QKSTAIR.
Memorandum for Chief, EE/1, dated 13 March 1951

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_2.jpeg ---
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
(When Filled In)
REQUEST FOR DISSEMINATION CHANGE OR CABLE REFERENCE SERVICE
HM-788
2D4921
16 SEP 1971
TO: CABLE SECRATARIAT BRANCH, OC
CABLE REFERENCE SECTION
IA-53 HQS. EXT. 6159, TUBE ES-6
FR
HOLMES RUSSELL B.
CI/EXO
EXT. 1253
SECRET
TUBE CTS TON
It is requested that the dissemination of
E2 IMPDET CL BY 004108
IN/DIR NUMBER
be changed as indicated.
STATION NUMBER
ADD:
Recall copies from:
☐ Change action from:
Authorized by:
To:
NAME (type or print)
In coordination with:
• NAME (type or print).
XX Please furnish one copy of the cable described. I have ☑
made inquiry of the CS Records control system.
have not
i
.IN/DIR NUMBER
STATION NUMBER
DATE
IN 46672
ATHE 3200
25.10.50
SUBJECT
KELLY
IN 30224
ATHE 4821
22. 3.51
"
IN 36130
ATHE 5150
20. 4.51
1.1
IN 36297
FRAN 2910
21. 4.51
IN 37092
ATHE 5205
25. 4.51
"
IN 37839
ATHE 5282
29. 4.51
"
EXT.
EXT.
SIGNATURE
FORM
11-72
1604 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS
CONFIDENTIAL
E-2, IMPDET CL. BY: 007622
(47)
;

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_24.jpeg ---
13-00000
18 April 1951 (date of memorandum)
Athens Station describes reasons for distrusting DIMITROV (see document)
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_25.jpeg ---
1300
'
19 April 1951
According to Yani KOLOMONOS, DIMITROV's friend, stated that the latter
agreed to meet PIRAY at the French Embassy between 11 and 12 o'clock
on Thursday, 19 April. At this meeting DIMITROV will (1) give the
French detailed accounts of all United States operations of which he is
aware, with special emphasis on Radio Gorianin, and (2) receive for this
information the sum of 10 to 15 million drachmae.
a
KOLOMONOS suggests that this effort of the French might be/communist
inspired attempt to penetrate United States intelligence activities.
Memorandum dated 18 April 1951

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_28.jpeg ---
13-00000
ATHE 4821 (in 30224), 22.3.51
5150 (in 36130), 20.4.51
AT HE 5150
FRAM
2910 (m 36297), 21.4.57
ATHE
5205 (141 37092), 25.4.59)
ATHE
5282 (m 37839), 29.4.51)
ATHE 3200 (In 46672), 25.10.50
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_27.jpeg ---
13-00000
3 May 1951 (dt of memorandum)
W. G. WYMAN, ADSO, informs ADPC of a report from a fairly reliable source,
from an informant who knows DIMITROV from having worked with him, but who
may be somewhat biased:
See document.
Memorandum for ADPC, dated 3 May 1951

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_26.jpeg ---
13.00000
Circa 21 April 1951
Discussions concerning disposal of DIMITROV since he had full knowledge
of names of next infiltration teams and general knowledge of operations.
WASH 38789 (OUT 97616), 21 April 1951

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_3.jpeg ---
13-00000
September 1944
After emerging briefly from hiding in September 1944, DIMITROV again went
underground engaging in anti-Communist activities, touring various towns
and cities (including sections of Yugoslavia and Macedonia) and urging
members of the Agrarian Party to take positive action against the Commu
nists.
104 CAGWU, dated 4 October 1950; Memorandum for the Record, 9.5.51

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_29.jpeg ---
13-00000
DIMITROV Dimiter Adamo
+ May 1924, bom in the village of Medikovels
-
Bulgaria
Lather
DST 18015
Athens 388
13.10.50
mother
1941-1942
1942-1943
1942
943
finished high school
studied philology
at So
Sofia University.
joined a secret branch of the Bulgarian
Nahonal Agrarian Union.
clos
began under around activities; worked.
underground cl
eorge
with DC. 6.111. DIMITROV
2.9.44
: en
9.9.44
27.10.44
Dimi
Rov
emerged.
ged from Inding to begint works with the
Mushanon Quitcher, Moravier Agrarians
: After events on 9.9.44 went into hiding
and began worki axust the communists.
sobotas be-
: accused by the government of
cause he lied agitated against this Russian
occupations troops.
°
Duma erisuing, maiths arrested. several time
Duing
in Ferdinand, Vralsa, and how, when released
from prison, he continued his
he continued, his illegal
illegal activities,
which seem to have consisted in travell.
uning
mizing loase.
loose-knit
from village to village, organizing
groups of agrarians to withstand Communist
Pressures.
His activities often lead him acoss the
Yugoslaw frontier. Worked in Vaidas Ware.
organizing Bulgarian sympathie
doma of

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_30.jpeg ---
13-00000
for the cause
of Dr. G. M. DIMITROV, and
April - May
upon
the advice of a catrin General
KITCHHAROV.
1945: In Sofie in contact with G.M. DIMITROV,
Nikala PETKOV, and Mara RAICHEVA.
fede
; obtained illegal identity card in name
of Bon's Stolkov a member of the 2nd
Belgrade Shock Bangade, Toured south.
western Yugoslavia, organizing Agrarians.
ports". Captured by Yugoslaw.
Sent back to Bulgana, exaped during
transfer: reached Sofia where he was helped
by Peter BELGASHKI, Colonel BAKELROS
an American sergeant named "Bucky"
General Craig, and Mrs. Minnie GALA-
BANOVA. Travelled through Bulgaria
"secret ports " - some 250.
organizing
18 November 1945 : during elections, spoke at secret meetings
in Vratsar, urging people to defeat com-
16
6 beugust
1946
munism.
: captured by police in Sofia, 18 days
without bread; 12 days
day's
ays without water.
on an electric torture machine. He
believes not executed because communests
wished to hold him as a witness w
preparation for the trial of Nikola PETISOV.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_33.jpeg ---
13-00000
--
y
30 April 1950
made a member of
nization formed
of the "P.D. PETKOV" oiga
Laurion. Say
his 12 "hard"
4
Says
as soon re
core" members in his group and S4 interested
supporters. will have 90 supporters
he can find the funds to print and dis.
tribute his program,
23 September 1950
1 organized.
in
• memorial service in Laurion
mmemorating the 3rd anniversary of the
hanging of Nikola PETKOV.
October 1950 - March 1951: (over)
25
("))
25
10.
NT
is January 1971 | Promisional Operational Clearance appreced, for
Bo march
1957
ninely days
(25.1 - 24.4.57)
: Operational Clearance granted
13, 14, 17 April 1951 I Saw FLORImond (in direct violation
17 April 1957
19 April 1951
FLORIMOND
our orders)..
: met French assistent military attache
PIRAY.
: Picked up by Greek Alien Directorate (over 2)
was to meet PIRAY at French Embassy.
() give detailed account
operations of
of
U.S..
which he aware, with
special emphasis on Radio Gonamin, an
Receive 10-15
15,000,$
drachmae For
for this
formation. (Apparently did not make
this
above.)
as he had been arrested see

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_31.jpeg ---
13-00000
tried in Vratsa Cont for" having
ofica
Bulgar
nized subversive groups all over But
itencials on
No
oups
on ford counts
a
3 years; jented
Confinew
death 15 years,
Litia
13.10 - 11.11.46
2.6
6:41
1
June 1947
8 July 1947
July 1947
24 July 1947.
· August 1947,
i tried; and sentenced to death by Sofia
Military
death
Court, Tired and sentenced to
by the court in Low.
: taken to a quarry in Vratsa.
I excaped from quarry's went to Mesdra
from there to zverova, then Sofia, where he
received help from British and Americans.
slept on one occasion in Sofia house
Jack HORNER.
crossed, Greek frantion south of Zigtegrade.
gave huunself up at
at shahii
admited to British hospital in Karithis
18 days later transferred to Brhigh hospital
in Salonika.
c. mid-September 1947; Sent 1 Athens, Breeks sent him to refugee
camp at Lavrion, stayed & mouths.
e. June
* See niemorand
dated. H. H. 52
1949*
•
1948
Ulysse 6.2"
Athens where he obtamed employment
broadcasting in Bulgarian, on Radio
Althens.
tranh việc consu
French
I worked for Presse FLORIMOND, Salonika

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_32.jpeg ---
13-00000
Images for 11375 EFOBIMOND'
The 1949 files* of the Fench
Higence network
Michel de la RONCIER
"Ulysse" run by Captain michs
Ne
[Military Attache of the French Embassy, Athens, listed
1 Dimitra DIMITROV as an agent (Ulysse
may
have skill been
62). He is..
6 sifurther described as being in contact with Tsenks and
Ivan BAREV, two Bulgarians who
working for with the British. In addition, DIMITROV,
contact of the Greek Aliens Directorate, His filen?
contained two reports, one dated
a con
April 1949, Conta
containing
situation and the other dated 6 April
account
"the melt
1949, containing an ances
Confination".
Corival
Greda Government
the
HOWM
4. These documents were obtained
*
Frenchs mitckigence files.
gave
by a penetration of
Captain de la RONCIER, was the viclitary Attache of
the French Embassy in Althens, who
French
operations out of
of Athens. Another Franch intelligence officer
was Pierre FLORIMOND, French vice consul and chief
the other network in Grecae, operated from sal
Captain de la RonciER described as FLORIMOND's
chief.
Salonica
12 STY on
OL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_35.jpeg ---
13-00000
5 September 1951
i Left Frankfurt for Paname where he
arrived on 5 september. He was placed in
detention at a hospital in Panama.
March 1952 : Transferied to JT ROBALO
dated 18.3.5t
28 July
1953.
Operational clearance cancelled
3

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_34.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
(2)
Principal agent is an ill-fated operation
un
in
• from October 1950 to March 1951. The.
operation resulted in a major
pose
trial in Sofia during 1951. The agents
used
of
were those selected by DIMITROV, at least
one of whom was probably an operative
the Bulgarian Militia and acted as the
betrayer of his colleagues.
M
ampent
Although the extent of DIMITROV's """""
knowledg
knowledge
operations was limited, it was considued
of 0.
extreme
12 14 15 1 18mily undensable to allow there farts
B W D
into French hands. Arrangements were there.
geme
fore made wirl Greek authorities for his
arsest just before his scheduled meeting p
with the French representative to whom
was to deliver the information and for
whom he was to receive the w
from
Bowye money.
(3) DIMITROV made six agents immediately availablen
for infitration operations. Three of these six were succes
on 10 December, carrying
of the Gulgarian
leaflets
emociatic
fully infiltrated
and
signed in the name.
Bloc, the emigré political group organized.
by DIMITROV,
by
ADIMITROV remained under Greek control until he left
and to Frankfurt.
Preece, by aut

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_39.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
HKAN-1067
with a minimum waiting period.
ing period. He gave a longthy, complicated
explasation of how this was supposed to work. However, their well
laid plans were wrecked by the arrival of a baby daughter while
they were in Rome, Italy on their first step toward immigration.
According to KELLY, this event forced their return to Athens where
he eventually got involved in Bulgarian operations. He declared
that had their plans worked out, he and his former wife had
agreed to part company once they were safely ensconced in
the United States.
We feel this account should be on record at the
Station because Judging from the past performance the infamous
becqua,
Lyle 0. KELLY (P) probably will come to our attention again.
Ve can provide more detailed information on ELLY's operational
history if required.
Vernon H. RAFEE
:
87' 8932
Richard P. SWENTZ

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_36.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
t
I
}
"enture family admited as permanent residents
on 26.11,56
T
Ft
1
Filed a Declaration of latention in USDC, Chicago
28.1256.
W
address (1960) 9 Hillside Avenue, Newark, HS,
1
☑
$
F
7
$7
Happ
+
+
1
{
As
1
th
14
3
Ite
t
Th
21
☑
1
☑
1
A
+
14
I
V
f
1
t
4
F
1
E
✓
F
t
1
3n+
3
4
7
1
1
**
F
7
767
F
}
f
2
1
1
i
1
+
1
1

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_37.jpeg ---
13-00000
+
Chief of Station, Athens
Chief, NB
SECRET
XX
PERANPART (Subject of Reference)
ABF: NEAL-62813, 17 July 1869
1. Subje
Subject of reference ma
Station officers under the m
recruited in October 1950 an
bo remembered by seme Athens
Lyle 0. KELLY (F). EFTLY vas
P.A. for a political, prycho-
logical, and guerrilla warfare project based in Greece and
targeted against Bulgaria. He is the subject of a five volume
201 dossier at Headquarters which goes back to 1949.
at
2. HNLY was born 7 May 1924 in Redkovota, Bulgaria.
studied philology for one year at Sofia University from 1942–49.
During the vår ho worked illegally in Greek Macedonia and Vardar,
Hacedonia to cape the German authorities. He returned hone
after the
disillusioned by the Communists and
do a clandestine tour of Bulgarian
tako positive action against communion.
he
want to Sofia. Lat
tomme urging agrariaes
Finally captured in Sofia, he stated that his life was spared
hockuso he was groomed as a witness against FEIEUW. He escaped
to Greece in 1947 and subsequently worked for the Grecks doing
occasional propaganda under a shortened version of his
his true first
KELLY
LLY was first contacted in Geteber 1950 by the Field
Chief of OPC activities in Athens, Greece. During the period
October 1950 through March 1951, he was employed by OFC, Athens
and provided 21 agents for infiltration into Bulgaria, but he
Distribution:
Athene
B2-6
NEAW-1067
27 AUG 1999
25 August 1969
201-045145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_38.jpeg ---
13-00000
SBC BBT
NKAN-1067
Ia
never participated in the actual cross-border operations.
early 1951, various operational and administrative difficulties
began to manifest themselves and it was decided that KELLY should
be removed from his position.
his position. In April 1951 it came to OPC's
tention that KELLY intended to sell his operational knowledge
the French Intelligence Service. This fact was used as the
primary reason for his removal from active participation in
Bulgarian operations.
4. Because of operational security considerations stemning
from KELLY's duplicity and personal make-up, it was deemed in-
advisable to leave him at large in GreecD. It uns decided to
transfer bin to a holding facility in the Western Hemisphere.
Be vas atrlifted from Athens to Frankfurt where he was hospital-
ized four days for observation, and then flown to the holding
facility, arriving on 4 September 1951. He remained there until
January 1984 when at that time it was determined whatever opera-
tional knowledge he had was obsolete.
be
8. After unsuccessful offerts to resettle KELLY' in "Brazil;
vas temporarily removed from the holding area to Syros, Grecco.
À commitment was made to the Greek authorities that RVROCK buld
not abandon him in Greece and would take steps to have him
resettled in one year. Efforts were made to effect KELLY!a
nigration to Canada, New Zealand, Australia, (and elsewhere, but
to no avail. After due consideration by the authorities
concerned, it was decided that the best effective solution
would be to let him immigrate to the United States on his own
under the Refugee Relief Act progran.
6. Since entering the United States, KELLY has been a
continual source of embarrassment. Heglomania is evident in his
various communications with U.S. government agencies. Over the
years he has written lengthy letters to the Director, Secretary
of State, USIA, Vice President Hixon, President Kennedy, etc.
▲ typical example of this correspondence was his letter to the
Vice President requesting an appointment as Mr. Nizen's anti-
communist advisor, or the statement in his letter to President
Kennedy that he could liberate the Balkan countries from Communien
in five years if he were allowed to work actively with financial
support. Our first knowledge that KELLY was representing himself
as a film producer was a 14 May 1987 notice from the Department of
State advising that KELLY was trying to interest then in purchasing
feature length film seript.
7. The last correspondence from Athens on KELLY is contained
in NKAA–990 of 26 April 1968, written by Philip L. BACHMAN (P).
On this occasion KELLY appeared at the American Embassy in Athens
asking to talk to the First Secretary. He identified himmelf as
leader of "The Bulgarian Liberation Underground Movement Against
Communion." The Station at this time reported no traces, but added
a comment that he probably was identical with Subject of 201-045145.
However, the Station evidently has no record of bis pseudo or his
early association with us.
8. A final note, concerning his marriage to the Greek woMAN
mentioned in reference, may be of interest considering the events
which generated the latest inquiry from the field. At one time
during his sojourn in the holding area mentioned above, KELLY COB-
fided that his marriage vas recoɛnized by both parties as one of
convenience. He claimed that be and his former wife agreed to
marry in order to be eligible for immigratios to the United States
0

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_41.jpeg ---
13-00000
+ CLASSIFICATION
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
S-E-C-R-E-T
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NO.
NKAA-2613
and that his use of the name of the current head of WOFIRM was
probably a means of attracting attention.
:
1
tive
2.
Cradle
Oliver M. COAKLEY
Walter D. NEWBY
-
FORM
10-57 53a
(40)
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
REPLACES FORMS
51-28, 51-28A AND 51-29
WHICH ARE OBSOLETE.
CLASSIFICATION
SEC-R-E-T
201-045145
NTIN
CONTINUED
PAGE NO.
2
"

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_4.jpeg ---
13-00000
1943
DIMITROV claimed he began underground anti-Fascist activities in 1943 in
Macedonia and to have worked closely with Dr. George M. DIMITROV (who
headed the left-wing of the Agrarian Party known as Pladne) during this
time.
104 CAGWU, dated 4 October 1950; Memorandum for the Record, dated 9.5.51
M

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_43.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
My
5. I have not seen the General since that evening.
mother saw him one time (3 April) just after his return to
New York, but has not seen him since. She still contends that
she never mentioned where I worked and says he must have put
two and two together. Any guidance you can provide on this
matter would be appreciated.
|:
SECRET
Carol L. Robarge.
FI/SIG/SSB
× 1433 Red

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_42.jpeg ---
13-00000
J
:
SEGRET
10 May 1967
i
:
:
MEMORANDUM TO: Chief, Office of Security
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Mr. James Thompson, PSD
General Dico DIMITROV
Memo of 13 March, same topic
1. General DIMITROV called the undersigned on 30 March to
say hello and request a meeting. We met for dinner at the Astoria
Restaurant at 8 p.m., 31 March.
2. During the course of the evening, Dico said he had seen
my boss.
When I asked whom he meant, he replied, Dick Helms. He
said he had known' Helms for years and further that he had seen
him that Thursday in order to find out his position on the new
organization the General was in which was holding its first rally.
the next evening in New York. (This organization has something
to do with rabid anti-communism and support for the U.S. in the
Vietnam war.) The General said Helms' position was one of go
ahead; he had no strong feelings supporting or condemning such
a group.
war.
3. Dico made further loud comments about support for the
Our waitress overheard and mentioned that she was leaving
the next morning for Saigon to entertain troops and to find out
what the war was really about. Dico made a small scene about how
wonderful this was, etc.
4.
The General is the most rabid anti-communist I have ever
met. For him there can be no compromise between them and the
Free world; they must all be destroyed. After continuing on in
this vein for some time, he finally quit. Also, he stated at the
beginning of the evening that he did not drink and then proceeded
to have a combination of drinks fairly fast. He did not appear
drunk, but with each drink he got louder and louder. The other
diners paid little attention, however, due to music and other
covering noises.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_44.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRE
4 APR 1967
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
:
DIMITROFF. Dimiter Adamoff
aka: DIMITRU, Dico, General
..
:
1. This memoranduun is for information only.
2. On 30 March 1967 the Subject, who identified himself
General Dimitrov, called your Office seeking an interview.
During the afternoon of the same date two representatives of my
Office interviewed the Subject in his hotel room in Washington, D. C.
3. The Subject stated that he was born la Bulgaria, is
currently stateless and has applied for United States citizenship.
He related a detailed account of his former activities as a
Bulgarian Freedom Fighter; claimed that he cooperated with a
United States military mission in Bulgaria in the 1940's and
stressed the fact that his only goals in life are the elimination
óf the world-wide menace of Communism and the liberation of
Bulgaria. ` He claims to have cooperated in the past with the
United States Information Agency and Radio Free Europe and
to have offered his services and those of his freedom fighters
to former Presidenta Truman, Eisenhower and Kennedy.
4. The Subject claimed to have visited your Office in
April 1962 as a result of a referral from the White House. Ha
advised that he is currently a Vice-President of the Anti-Commu-
nist International and works closely with former United States
Representative Hamilton Fish from New York who is one of the prin-
cipal sponsors of this organization. Dimitrov is currently staying
in New York City and advised that he came to Washington to can-
gratulate you on your appointment as Director of Central Intelli-“
gence; to advise you that he is attempting to form a World Tribunal
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automat
downgrowing and
Declassification

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_45.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
!
SECRET
to counteract the anti-American feeling which Betrand Russell
is spreading throughout the British Isles and Europe; and to seek
$50,000 from CIA to enable him to start production in Greece and
Spain on a movie concerning the history of Greek mythology. The
Subject claimed that, once he had successfully completed this
film, he would be given world recognition and could then do what
he feels is his real goal in life, namely to produce films depicting
the evils of Communism.
5. . A review of Agency files discloses that, during the
period October 1950 through March 1951, the Subject was
utilized by OPC in Athens, Greece and provided 21 agents for
infiltration inte Bulgaria. In early 1951, various operational
and administrative difficulties began to manifest themselves
and it was decided that the Subject should be removed from his
position. In April 1951 it came to OPC's attention that Subject
intended to sell his knowledge of CIA's activities to the French
Intelligence Service. Because of operational security considerations
stemming from his duplicity and personal make-up, it was deemed
inadvisable to leave the Subject st large in Greece and it was
decided that he should be transferred to the CIA holding facility
at Fort Clayton, Panama. He remained there until January 1954.
6. In May 1953, a CIA case officer was dispatched from
Headquarters to Fort Clayton where he interrogated the Subject.
It was determined at that time that whatever operational knowledge
the Subject had of CIA, its methods, personnel and operations
were obsolete.
7. On or about 12 Jamäry 1954, while still at Fort
Clayton, the Subject signed a Certificate of Understanding and
was temporarily removed to Greece due to the termination of
the holding facility and the fact that there were no immediate
Z
SECRET
:
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_40.jpeg ---
13-00000
TO
INFO.
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief, NE
Chief of Station, Madrid;
Chief, European Division
Chief of Station, Athens
SUBJECY PERAMPART
Dimitrios DIMITROF
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION:
CLASSIFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
1142
FYI and Direct Traces
Th
PROCESSING ACTION
X MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
MICROFILM
1
DPOB:
1. Subject is Dimitrios #*DIMITROF aka General Dico DIMITROV;
24 May 1924 Bulgaria; Citizenship: Unknown; Occupations
Movie film producer; Address: c/o Marjorie DARE, 360 West 22nd Street
New York, New York; Miscellaneous: Claims to have worked for WOFIRM.
-
2. Subject came to Station attention as a result of a pre-
marital investigation which was being conducted by LNEASE on
Kalliopi Stylianou GERALEXIS, aka "Poppy", Mrs. Dimitrios DIMITROF,
born 18 August 1941 in Athens, Greece who was married to Subject in
a civil ceremony in Italy on 4 July 1962. The marriage was not
recognized by Greek law. Under separate cover is a copy of the
LNEASE memo which outlines Subject's allegations regarding
collaboration with WOFIRM.
3. The marital investigation turned up the following traces
from the Liaison Section of the American Embassy in Madrid, Spain:
"This office has information on a Diko DIMITROFF, who may be
identical with Subjeet's (GERALEXIS') former husband. A source
of unknown reliability reported in 1965 that Diko DIMITROFF had
connections with the Bulgarian Intelligence Service and with a
dissident group in Bulgaria. DIMITROFF represents himself as a
film producer".
4. The only remotely identifiable traces at Athens Station
are on a Dimitri DIMITROV aka Dimitur Adamov DIMITROV, DOB circa
1920, who was a member of the Bulgarian Agrarian Party and a student
who fled to Greece in 1946. (Source: PGA-4769 of 8 March 1950,
file 33-5-2). He was in contact with the A.D. at that time and
reported that he had an order to go to Washington for a time. The
above is carded info only with a caption: "French I.S.".
5. Subject also has travelled to Italy, France, England, and
Switzerland in connection with the movie industry, but we defer to
Headquarters regarding possible notification of other field stations
until after they have conducted traces. In the meantime we have
informed LNEASE/Athens that Subject has no connection with WOFIRM
Att: LNEASE Memo; USC Distribution: ✓1-Chief, NE; Att USC
ROSS REFERENCE TO
S/C ATT'D BY HAMBOL AND NUMBER
Dated 24 Juil
33-2--
201
045145
NKAA-2613
CLASSIFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
DATE 1-COS, Madrid; Att. USC
1-Chief, EUR; Att. USC
201-045145
HQS FILE NUMBER
17

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_48.jpeg ---
13-00000
1
Anti-Communist International
U.S.A. OFFICE: 2188 BROADWAY - NEW YORK
OX 7-5895
The A. C. I. is starting V.V. (VICTORY FOR VIETNAM)
RALLIES
SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1967, 7:00 P.M. at 4 W. 43rd St.
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY CLUB will be the first rally
with these important main speakers.
Adm. Joseph J. Clark (U.S.N. Ret.)
Hon. Hamilton Fish
Wto Battista, Tuxpayers Org.
Lee Sterling, American Property Rights Assn.
General Dico Dimitroff
APMOT „McCullogh, Peter Fechter Brigade
Edward Rorer, America Putriots for Freedom
Jason Friedman, Director Jewish Section of the
A. C. I.
Make reservations either by phone, OX 7-5895 or by
mail, P.O. Box 1095, N. Y. 10017.
Bring your friends. Be there to help the fighting
boys in Vietnam and the Vietnamese People. Help
the President of the U.S.A. and his Military Leaders.
in Vietnam to win the war in the battlefield, which
will produce the VICTORY PEACE TALKS.
Dr. Wm. GLASKOW, Chrmn.
A. R. K. JERIC, Treasurer
S. KRAWEC, Publish. Dept.
Havly SCHIEBER, Gen'l. Sec.
Mail adress:
P. O. Box 1095.
New York, N. Y. 10017

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_5.jpeg ---
13-00000
October 1946
DIMITROV arrested by the police. He believes the reason he was not exe-
cuted was that the communists wanted to use him as a witness against
Nikola PETKOV.
104 CAGWU, dated 4 October 1950; Memorandum for the record, 9.5.51

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_47.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
:
On 29 September 1961, the Subject called
the Office of the DCI requesting an appoint-
ment. The matter was referred to Mr.
Sheridan who advised Mir. Hill of the DCI
Protective Staff to tell the Subject that his
story was a matter of record and that there
would be no purpose in further interviews
unless he had something new to add.
9. On 31 March 1967, in view of the above information
concerning the Subject's past activities, a representative of my
Office called the Subject at his hotel in Washington, D. C., and
advised him that the results of his interview of 30 March had been
passed to appropriate Agency officials and that if any interest
developed he would be contacted.
10. No further action will be taken in this matter unless
requested by you.
Bolar
:
!
BULLOCK: dr
3 April 1967.
* Distribution:
Orig.
2
->
Return to OS
DD/S
1
-
ER
Howard J. Osborn
Director of Security
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_46.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
:
SECRET
possibilities to resettle him. CIA made a commitment to the
Greek authorities that it would not abandon the Subject in Greeca
and would take steps to remove him from.Greek soil within one
year. Efforts were made to effect the Subject's migration to
Canada, New Zealand, Australia and elsewhere, but to no avail.
After due consideration by interested Headquarters elements and
the Athens Station, it was decided that the most affective solution
for the Subject's disposal would be to let him immigrate to the
United States on his own under the Refuges Relief Act program,
but without any assistance from CIA.
8. Since his arrival in the United States, the Subject
has come to our attention on the following occasions:
On 14 May 1957, the Department of State
informed CIA that the Subject had contacted
their Office and tried to interest them in
purchasing a feature length film script
and asked if a representative of CIA would
like to meet the Subject and discuss the
script. The offer was turned down.
On 28 June 1960, the Subject attempted to
arrange a meeting with the then Vice-
President Richard M. Nixon. A member
of Mr. Nixon's staff turned the matter
over to Mr. F. J. Sheridan, Contact
Division, Office of Operations. Mr.
Sheridan interviewed the Subject at
length, acting on behalf of Mr. Nixon's
staff, with no CIA connection. No.
commitments were made to the Subject.
3
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_49.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
Anti-Communist International
U.S.A. OFFICE: 2188 BROADWAY. NEW YORK
Phone: 0X-76895
Mail adress:
P. O. Box 1095
New York, N. Y. 100
r. Wm. GLASKOW, Chrmn..
R. K. JERIC, Treasurer
KRAWEC, Publish. Dept.
aviy SCHIEBER, Gen'l. Sec.
February 19, 1967
RECEPTION TO WELCOME His Excellency BUJ DIEM
South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States,
at the Park Sheraton Hotel in New York City. ·
To all friends of the ANTI-COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL and partå-
cipating guests and organizations:
This important event was successful.
Messages of greeting and support arrived from U.S. Senators:
Thomas J. Dodd, J.W. Fulbright, Joseph Tydings, H.A. Williams Jr.,
Peter H. Dominick, Edward W. Brooke, Russell B. Long and James B.
Pearson; Congressmen: Daniel J. Flood, Herman T. Schneebeli, John J.
Rhodes Robert J. Corbett, Joseph P. Addabbo, Charles E. Bennett, Wil-
liam E. Dickinson, Porter Hardy Jr., Joe Pool, William S. Mailliard
and James B. Utt; Governors: John H. Chafee, Claude R. Kirk, Winthrop
Rockefeller, Dan Moore, George Romney, Richard J. Hughes and Lieut.
Governor Malcolm Wilson; President of the Cancil of the City of New
York Frank D. O'Connor; Presidents of the N.Y.C. Boroughs of Manhattan,
Bronx and Queens Percy E. Sutton, Herman Badillo and Mario J. Cariello;
also from the Permanent Missions to the U.N. of Malta and New Zealand.
A large number of representatives of civic, patriotic and anti-
communist organizations were there.
The Honorable Hamilton Fish a congressman of 40 years, who ori-
ginated the House Committee on Un-American Activities was chairman of
the event.
These people spoke on behalf of their organizations:
Edward Rorer for American Patriots 1or Freedom;
Arnold McCullogh for Peter Fechter Brigade;
Inc.
Lee S. Sterling for American Property Rights Association;
Maxwell-Miller for GIIP (Community Housing Improvement Program,
Juan Lugo of Local 6 of the Hotel' and Club Employees' Union;
General Dico Dimitroff of the Bulgarian polotical exiles;
Prof. Dr. Nakashidzé of Columbia University, Captive Nations Committe,
Buenos Aires, Argentina;
Thomas Veteska, general secretary of the Union of Slovak Combatants;
Cathryn Dorney of the American Education association;
Captain Janes Jones, recently returned from long service in Vietnam.
.'
In the name of the Anti-Communist International spoke :
Dr. Wm. Glaskow ("Soviet Russia is fighting the Vietnam war by proxy")
A. R. K. Jeric ("Communism in practice is a one-man-mononoly-ownerchin

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_52.jpeg ---
13-00000
Guidepost, January 22, 1965
joan allen.
ment to back it, the Zarzuela Theatre
on Jovellanos, 4. has rounded up a
brilliant group of actors, singers and
directors and has come back with some
really exciting revivals.
AWC members and their husbands
can call Jo Pitts 250 03.35; Cherry Da-
nos 253-60-79; or Jane Cabanyes for
tickets.
NEW BRITISH PRESS ATTACHE - Greeting the British Ambassador SIR GEORGE LABOUCHERE,
left, at their party given in Madrid's international Props Club are Mr. KEITH, the new Prese
Attaché at the British Embassy, and his wife, BETTY,
Cocktails At The Ross'. The Ross A.
Ross' red carpet was well and truly
rolled out this last week for visiting
and handsome son Dean taking leave
from the U.S.S. Springfield and looking
up old friends in his one-time stomp-
ing ground.
Among those welcoming Dean at a
cocktail party given by Mary-Alice and
Ross last Thursday at their Generali.
simo apartment were Stewart Baxter
of American Express; Major Ben
Clark and his wife Alms; writer Alfred
Brown and his wife Adriana: José Ma
ria Garriga, head of the Aira Travel
Agency: Major Mike Payne and his
wife Nina: Anni and Dale Brannon:
American stage and screen actor Ben
Tatar: Air Force Contractor Jesse
Greene; Ken Crosby of Merrill Lynch.
whose wife Cricket was not present
but was, according to Ken, whelping
Larry Bell's wife Jeanne have her
baby. (It was a boy!): Mariano Blitz.
General Motors Distributor and his
wife; Corinne Jordy, ex Madrid class-
mate of Dean's; Araceli and Ed Kreis
ler: Tony Blomfield. just returned
from the U.S. and minus his wife.
Harriette, who had a touch of La
Grippe. The Blomfields left later to
join their yacht in Alicante; Col. John
Ferry and his wife Carmen: Franz
Krell of Casa Americana and his
attractive daughter Olivia; Oliver Trit
ton, who is with the Banco Español de
Crédito, Banesto; and Nick Fogarty of ·
the maintenance company Tumpane,
The Moment Of Truth. Christine
Harding, daughter of the British Vice
Consul in Madrid, might well look
pleased (candles don't count at 161) as
she cuts a birthday cake dedicated to
CHRISTINE HARDING, British Vice-Consul's daughter mentertains (left to right) MYE BRUTON,
PHILLIPA SAMUEL, ANN and ANTHONY BLACKIE
"Man of the Year" El Cordobés. The
cake of course represented the bull-
ring, complete with toro, matador and
swords. Giving her a helping hand
. were. among others. Clive Bruton
whose father is
father is with the British
Institute; Phillipa Samuel, daughter
of lan Samuel, Minister at the British
Embassy; and Ann and Anthony
Blackie, whose father Jim Blackie is
the Australian Consul General in
Madrid.
An old hand at birthdays and some.
what of a rolling stone, Christine
takes credit for having spent her
spent her
previnus ones in nine diferent
countries.
SAY YOU SAW. IT
her recent birthday party.
«Greek Gods To Roll In June. Go
big all the way is Diko Dimitroff,
Bulgarian-born poet,
poet, screen - writer,
director and producer, who flashed
into our office.this week with plans
to make the biggest movie of all time.
Slightly built, with hazel eyes, the
softly spoken head of Diko Produc-
tions Inc. went on to tell us more.
about his 15-year-old dream. The Loves
of the Greek Gods, which he plans
to film in Spain and Greece. Interiors
are to be done in Madrid with the
use of the Bronston equipment. All
exteriors will be shot in Greece involv-
ing the use of Mount Olympus and
continued.
IN GUIDEPO.ST
19

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_50.jpeg ---
13-00000
ORDER
:
C
The
Order of Lafayette
Is Honored In Conferring Its Membership On
GENERAL DICO DIMITROV
✰✰✰ PREAMBLE OF THE ORDER OF LAFAYETTE ✰✰✰
For God and Country, we pledge our support:
To maintain mutual understanding and cooperation
between the United States and France, and to uphold and
defend the ideals of JUSTICE, FREEDOM, DEMOCRACY
and PEACE, for which we fought.
To Unite the destinies of both Republics in defense of a
free world realizing that any weakening of our traditional
friendship would help World Communism and jeopardize
the survival of Free Nations..
LIVE LA FRANCE - GOD BLESS AMERICA
Hamilton Fisn
President-General
March 10, 1967
Date
1

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_51.jpeg ---
13-00000
dnesday, August 4, 1965
•
lie Andrews Signed
›r Hitchcock Film
-
NEW YORK Alfred Hitchcock
signed Julie Andrews to star, op.
ite Paul Newman in his forthcom-
spy tale, "Torn Curtain," to be
ased by Universal Pictures. Mig
MOTION PICTURE DAILY
TELEVISION TODAY
AROUND THE
Berle Adams to Direct
ND THE TV
TV CIRCUIT Broadcasting Awards
with PINKY HERMAN
frews will report to the director LUNCHING Friday with Diko Dimitroff and enjoying the exuberant
.
on completion of her role An
waii."
Torn Curtain" will be Hitchcock's
h picture and his first under his
ently signed three-picture deal
h Universal. He plans to begin
duction Oct. 1, with exterior se-
nces to be filmed on foreign loca-
the interiors shot at Um
al City Studios.
atz
(Continued from page 1).
pictures for theatrical and tele-
on outside the United States and
ada.
latz has been affiliated with Hy-
1 since 1954 with the formation of
nan's Associated Artists Produc-
s which later became United Art-
Associated. He subsequently
ed as director of foreign opera-
s for United Artists Associated
United Artists Television.
AG Pact
(Continued from page 1)
PANGASINAN LUJIIImidility **talking to
iselves: '
"
The fee formula sets seven base
gories against which payments are
e computed. For an actor who
ced one day in a picture, the base
100; two days, $150; three days,
; four days, $250; five days or
week, $300; more than one week
not more than two weeks, $400;
than two weeks, $500.
or the first TV release of a film,
ers will receive 30 per cent of
base. When the producer's gross
es $125,000, players will receive
dditional 12% per cent; at $200,-
an additional 25 per cent; at
,000, an additional 22½ per cent;
400,000, an additional 22% per
at $500,000, an additional 20
cent; for each $100,000 above
,000, an additional 10 per cent.
hen a film is released on a major
ork in prime time, players are
Steed 70 per cent of the base
in!."
"
erson Acquires Four
OLLYWOOD-Joseph C. Emer-
president of Emerson Entertain-
Enterprises, announced yester-
the acquisition of four features
lobal scope for U.S. release.
en Against the Sun" is a World
II story shot in Technicolor in
alia. "Make Like a Thief" is a
story in Technicolor filmed in
nd starring
starring Richard.. Long.
:
e Swords for Rome" was filmed
ly and "Saturday Night in Apple
"
y," stars Mimi Hines, Paul Ford
Cliff Arquette.
presentation of his plans to produce-direct a $20,000,000 film saga,
"The Loves of the Greek Gods," based on Greek mythology reminded
this reporter of the time many years ago when a Boston exhibitor named
Joseph E. Levine (whom we met through a mutual friend, WORL
Deejay Norm Prescott) revealed his ideas of "how to produce and exploit
motion pictures" with the result that the following week we printed in
this pilar a paragraph in which we predicted Levine would "make mo-
tion picture history by sheer showmanshin”. After two months in Gotham,
finalizing pre-production plans, Diko leaves Thursday for his office in
Madrid where he'll set in motion his ambitious production on this epci
to be filmed in Greece skedded to start in the Spring of 1966 and
featuring 30 international stars. . . .
.
The zoom film effects, one of the many features of the "Pack & Jingle
TV spot, MPO-produced "Newport" cigarets commershill for Lennen
Newell, all of which added up to copping top mixed technique class hoñors
at the Cannes International Film Festival, were achieved by Eastern Effects,
Inc., New York-based film opticals and effects firm which used the new
EMELL Camera. Prexy Maurice Levy of Eastern Effects has also personally
developed several camera techniques as well as improved optical benches in
the past decade. . . . Formerly with Paramount and Universal on the west
coast and more recently director of press information and promotion for ABC-
TV's News Division, Frank Little has joined McFadden, Strauss, Eddy &
Irwin as account executive. . . . Young man in a hurry is Michael Stanwood,
a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania in 1964, who's already starred
in three Broadway productions, just been signed to a Universal-TV contract
and will debut in the "Kiss Me As You Go" seg of that studio's "Run for
Your Life" series, starring Ben Gazzara, Barry Sullivan and Brenda Scott
and megged by Leslie Martinson. . .
Lucille Ball, who will be CBSeen as Steve Lawrence's first guest
when his program preems Monday, Sept. 13 (10-11 P.M., EDT) sat
beside Steve in the howda of Wanda, the pink elephant, when the
pachyderm strode through Shubert's Alley last Wednesday to highlight
the program's introduction to N'Yawkers. The many luminaries
including Rudy Vallee, Johnny Carson, Vaughn Monroe, who've been
enjoying the Chinese cuisine featured at co-owner Ging Tom's Six Hap-
piness may or may not be aware of the fact that the gracious Ging is
the fifth generation of the famous family or restauranteurs.
•
•
Hollis
Alpert has written an interesting story on the coming 20th Century- Fox
TV CBScience-fiction series, "Lost In Space," in the current issue of
Woman's Day Magazine. Miss Alpert believes this one could last longer
than "I Love Lucy," which is quite a prediction.. Freemantle Inter-.
national's "Romper Room," created and produced live 13 years ago by
Bert & Nancy Claster in Baltimore, is now seen in Canada, Mexico,
Brazil, Japan, The Philippines, Great Britain and in six markets in
Australia.
•
Lee Savage, winner of the 1963 Guggenheim Fellowship and well known
creative artist, and Harold Friedman, former veepee and exec producer at
. Elektra Films, have formed a new TV production firm, Savage-Friedman,
Inc. . . . Ex-Newspaperman ("Cleveland. News") and formerly gen. mgr. of
WJW-TV, Ben Wickham resigned his post with TV Information Office and
as of next Monday joins MGM-TV as a general sales exec headquartering in
Gotham. ... Last CBSaturday afternoon we liked the novel TV'er, profiling
li'l ole N'Yawk and especially enjoyed the ditty, "New York's a Great Place
to Be," cleffed by Joan Bender and Bob Hughes. . . . Official Films has pur-
chased an as yet unpublished novel entitled, "Manhattan House" by David
Rintels, which will be developed into a full hour dramatic teleseries to be
produced by Robert Blees. This marks Blees' fourth package, the other three
already skedded for launching by Official next season are a dramatic-musical
by Herbert Baker, a half-hour comedy series, "Off We Go" by Bob Kaufman
and Bill Fox, and "Meet the Mooses" by Henry Garsson and Edmund Beloin.
…. ABC Films will shoot a pilot for a new music series, featuring "The Song
Spinners" and tentatively slated for a 10 P.M. slot Saturdays over WABC-TV
with additional showings on a syndication basis. Program will be co-directed
by Hal Tolchin, who recently directed the "Swinging World of Sammy Davis"
special, and Jimmy Starbuck, choreographer on many top-notch TV'ers in-
cluding "Your Show of Shows," "Carol Burnett Show” and others. Exec pro-
ducer will be Stanley S. Greene,
:
'
:
NEW YORK Berle Adams, v
president of MCA, Inc., has accept
the post of general chairman of 1
1965-66 International Broadcasti
Revards, according to James
Thompson, president of the Hol
wood Advertising Club, sponsor of 1
event.
More than 1,000 broadcasting (
ecutives from all over the world :
expected to attend the judging
radio and television commercia
which will be held this year at t
Hollygod Palladium March 19/1
festiv is now in its sixth year.
TENT TALK
MIAMI-Henry Oxell, chief bark
of the local Variety Club, Tent 3
already is signing up members for t
Variety Club International conventi
in London next April, and so far b
34 reservations for the Miami-Lisbo
London flight.
A
BOSTON-The 17th annual Jimn
Fund drive, to raise money for t
Children's Research Foundation, w.
launched recently, according to Thon
´as A. Yawkey, president of the four
dation. At the same time, one 1
the most unusual tieins ever made wi
scheduled in connection with th
dused: Fundrast "Aultimá¨¨¨vfcopiti
dent Edwin W. Breed and Jimm
Fund executive director William
Koster have completed arrangemen
whereby the airline will supply ai
craft during the month of Augu
in Boston, Portland, Me., New Ber
ford, Mass., and Manchester, N.H. fo
a one-hour sightseeing trip witho
charge to persons contributing $5 ‹
more to the Jimmy Fund.
Northeast pilots and stewardess
have volunteered their services for 2
scheduled flights from Cape Cod. 1
the White Mountains, into Main
Vermont and other scenic New Ent
land areas. A celebrity will accon
pany each flight. Baseball's Ted Wi
liams will be on the first flight.
British Admissions
Declined During May
From THE DAILY Burran ___
"
LONDON - · A drop in cinema ad
missions in the United Kingdom i
May this year produced the lowes
figure on record since the Board c
Trade has compiled weekly averag
admission figures. The figure was
weekly average of 5.5 million durin
May-a+ fall of 700,000 on the 6.
million average weekly admissions i
May 1964.
Takings, however, were equal at
weekly average of £1.03 million. Th
fall in admissions in May, compare
with the previous month, follower
the seasonal pattern with a drop o
two million on the weekly average
Takings in April average £1.38 mil
lion weekly.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_54.jpeg ---
13-00000
: IS WHAT I AM TRYING TO DO NOW
THE
INTERNATIONAL
☐ NEWSPAPER
Film
7
DAILY
TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 1964
OF
MOTION PICTURES
Established May 8, 1918
EPERN
TEN CENTS
RT THROWS OUT PAY-TV SUIT
s for
DW
lions
attack on some
prevent a free
tures in seven
unched by the
AB-PT Income Rises;
Theatre Take Larger
American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatres showed record income.
for 1963 accompanied by a rise in earnings from the theatre division,
President Leonard H. Goldenson disclosed yesterday. The AB-PT
Jacobellis Case Up
ation of Film To High Court Again
ons, Ralph Het-
association and
the Motion Pic-
America, said
g to New York.
Page 5)
Film
A Drive
president of
Fill serve as
Motion Picture
MANDEL
goal appeal
odern Art
IY Festival
odern Art may
the New York
ear, a Museum
Iged yesterday.
1 of participa
decided by the
Page 5)
-
Washington Bureau of THE FILM DAILY
Washington The Supreme
Court yesterday set the long-
awaited second argument of the
Nico Jacobellis case for next week
The second arguments will be heard
just before a book obscenity case,
and the decision of the highest
court to listen again may presage a
more sweeping decision on obscen-
ity in motion pictures than has
been handed down in previous
cases.
Cleveland Heights theatre man-
ager Jacobellis was convicted under
(Continued on Page 4)
Jimmy Grainger Heads
Sales for AllStar
-
West Coast Bureau of THE FILM DAILY
Hollywood I J. R. "Jimmy"
Grainger, industry veteran who
formerly headed RKO Radio Pic-
tures, is back in action with the
formation here of AllStar Films,
a new distribution - production
company.
Grainger, one-time Fox and
(Continued on Page 4)
overall income was $386,729,000
for the year compared to $379,-
741,000 in 1962.
Theatre earnings, not usually re-
vealed, were $76,209,000 for 1963
compared to $75,956,000 in 1962.
Merchandise sales were $29,948,000
(Continued on Page 2)
'Greatest' Campaign
Focus on Pictorial
Except for the picture itself the
photography in George Stevens
"The Greatest Story Ever Told”
will constitute
"the single
greatest selling
tool," according
to United Art-
ists plans.
Gabe Sum-'
ner, UA nation-
al director of
advertis-
ing, publicity
and exploita-
tion, said yes-
terday "The
Greatest Story"
promotion
STEVENS
promises to be "the most exten-
(Continued on Page 4)
Exhibs Win First
Round in Calif.;
STV Plans Moves
By WILLIAM ORNSTEIN
West Coast Editor of THE FILM DAILY
Hollywood Subscription
-
TV lost the first round of a
four-round bout in the Cali-
fornia arena with the Crusade for
Free TV. The initial round dropped
to theatre owners was dismissal by
U.S. District Court Judge William
C. Mathis of the $117,541,500 anti-
trust and conspiracy suit filed last
Dec. 17 against the Crusade and 20
defendants, including theatre com-
(Continued on Page 5)
Naify Fills Skouras
Spot in Magna Pix
Marshall Naify, president of
United Artists Theatre Circuit
and of United California Theatres,
has been elected president of
Magna Pictures Corp. Naify fills
the vacancy in Magna created by
the death of George P. Skouras.
Another vacancy caused by
Skouras' death, the presidency of
Todd-AO, has been filled by Salah
Hassanein, United Artis's Thea-
tre Circuit Executive Vice-Presi-
dent.
Naify said that Magna, which.
produced “Oklahoma!” and “South
Pacific" would step up its picture
production in both in Dimension
150 or roadshow presentation and
in 5mm for regular release.
British Box Office Attendance Stronger Greek Gods' to Roll in '65
-
London. Both film box office receipts and attendance for January
1964; were up over January, 1963, statistics of the Board of Trade here
reveal.
Weekly average theatre take in January, 1964, was £1.24 million com-.
pared to £1.08 million. Weekly attendance for January, 1964 was 7.9
million compared to 7.6 million in the s`me month last year. (The pound
is at $2.82).
'
At $20 Million Budget
Diko Prod., Inc., a new Ameri-
can-Greek company with head-
quarters in Athens, plans to pro-
duce “The Loves of the Greek
Gods" in Greece and in the Bron-
ston Studios in Madrid at “a cost
(Continued on Page 2)
ISN'T IT TIME YOU CAME HOME TO ROOST AT Pathé
Hollywood
New York
Toronto

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_53.jpeg ---
13-00000
talk
about
spain
continued
other authentic sites. The producer
went on to explain, I plan to bring all
the 'Gods' together to make this
movie.» He named such box office
'draws' as Victor Mature to play the
role of Zeus; Kirk Douglas as Adonis;
Tony Curtis as Apollo; Peter Ustinov
as Dionysus; and Jean Simmons as
Athena. According to the producer,
there are many candidates for the role
of Aphrodite (Venus) but as yet she
has not been named. «I'm using the
largest enst ever,» Dimitroff told us,
unt Olympla alone there will be 30,000
extras and there are 65 starring roles.n
A 4-hour-long epic, the cost of making
It is estimated at twenty million dol
lars and shooting is expected to take
a full year, starting in June-Greek
Gods willingl
.
11
November to April -- is becoming their
favorite winter ground, so much so
that a huge congress hall is now
planned.
Following the fashion to pick sunny
.climes for winter work, the executive
committee of the International Union
of Architects have just spent six days
at Hotel Pez Espada, fixing the agenda
for their big annual congress in July,
The summer congress, of course, will
be held up north, in Paris. Flags were
hoisted outside Málaga Airport and
the hotel for each of the 22 nation.
alities attending, including the sham-
mer and sickle» for the Moscow
de gate. The seven three-hour sessions,
presided over by Sir Robert Matthew.
were-spent sifting subjects to be dis
cussed at the Paris
Paris congress.' An'
interpreter sent along by the local
tourist office withered under the cross-
costa del sol fire of languages, so an urgent call went
Congresses In Winter. Conttresses,
like birds, tend to come South in
winter. Our sunny Coast-six averagė
hours of sunshine a day from
20
out fo Fuengirola for Lana, wife of ex-
Soviet painter, Sacha Lloutikoff, who
speaks five languages including Rus
stan.
Delegates took a day off for some
GETTING YOUR HAIR BACK IS
ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE, BUT IT
CAN BE SAVED
Not every case is the samell.
YOUR CASE MAY REQUIRE SPECIAL
TREATMENT
Ask for information and a study of your
case, and you will learn the cause of
loss and the appropriate remedy.
ADLER
HAIR TREATMENT CENTER
(under medical direction)
MADRID: Torre de Madrid 8.0 9
BARCELONA: Vía Layetana, 180
-
Tel: 2 41 44 75
Tel. 2 27 0574
CPS 872
SAY YOU SAW IT IN
•
sunshine and an extensive tour of the
Coast. They mostly agreed that the
Coast has some fine buildings, but
sadly lacks a master plan. The Rus
sian, Guerogui Orlov, said he was
particularly impressed by Marbella's
Ciudad Residencial, the State holiday
resort for workers. Local Spanish
reporters eager for an interview found
the Russian rather untalkative, though
he did confess he liked Flamenco. The
delegates rounded off the busy week
with a dinner gala in the hotel, and
left Saturday.
-
Gibralfaro Castle A Tourist Center?
The ruined ninth-century castle on
Gibralfaro, the pine-covered hill over-
looking Málaga, is probably going to
be urbanized as a tourist center. It
has been suggested that an auditorium,
with rooms for gatherings like interna-
¨tional congresses, be built within the
castle walls. The idea was put to M;i-
laga's Mayor, Sr. Rafael Betes, by the
Under Secretary of Tourism, Sr. Gar-
cía Rodriguez-Acosta, during his short
visit here last week. He said Gibral-
faro's beautiful position and views
should be utilized more. The Mayor
later took a bird's eye view of the site
from the helicopter of the visiting
American flag ship, USS Springfield.
Gibralfaro is a great favorite with
everyone. Tourists climb it to explore
the castle, gasp at the breathtaking
views of the town and harbor and eat
at the State restaurant built just below
the castle walls. The hill also over-
looks the bullring and hundreds of
malagueños climb it to take a free
peek at corridas.
Winter Course For Foreigners. Below
Gibralfaro's battlements, just a spear's
throw away, lies the comparatively
new Casa de Cultura where, on Friday
last week, the Mayor opened the 18th
Winter Course for Foreigners. More
than 100 students have come from
many countries for this extensive two-
month course in Spanish language and
culture, which happens to coincide
with Málaga's equally famous Winter
Sports Festival. Students are lodged
with local families and most days, at-
tend lectures by university professors,
go on excursions and take part in all
sorts of social and cultural events.
Tied in with this year's course is a
three-week exhibition of paintings
by five well-known southern artists
with strong local connexions. They are
Alberka, Barbadillo, Brinkmann, Hier
måndeg and Prinado. Gabriel Alber
ka. 30, lives in Torremolinos and has
GUIDEPOST
IN GUIDEPOST

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_6.jpeg ---
130
23 July 1947
He escaped to Greece.
Memorandum for the Record, 9.5.51

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_58.jpeg ---
13-00000
SEGRE
CONTROL
U.S. OFFICIALS ONLY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.
DEC 14 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COORDINATION
Activities of Dimiter Adomov Dimitrov in Greece
SUBJECT:
1. The following information concerning the activities of
Subject in Greece was recently received from the field. It is
brought to your attention for your information, and for such
comments as you may be able to make.
2.
According to a fairly reliable informant, Subject,
allegedly acting on instructions from members of the American
Embassy at Athens, has lately become very active among Bulgarian
refugees in Greece. Early in October 1950, Subject visited the
Lavrion Camp where he met with a number of his Bulgarian friends
and advised them that he had been given a "charter and instruc…
tions," by certain members of the American Embassy, to form a
committee of five members for the planning and execution of a
fight for the liberation of Bulgaria. This committee, according
to Subject, would be established in Athens and would cooperate
with other similar committees which have already been formed 1,
France, Germany and other countries. The committee would later
expand to 20 members and would establish a so-called "Democratic
Agrarian Bloc.
3. Subject is further reported to have stated that recruits
would come from among the members and sympathizers of the
Bulgarian Democratic Party (Moushynov) and from the Gichev
Agrarians. The members of the Leftist Agrarian Party (G.M. Dimitrov
or "Pladne" group) and right-wing elements would be excluded.
Eligible Bulgarian emigres would come to Greece from Western
Europe to assist in the work, and prominent members of the Gichev
Agrarians and of the Democratic Party would be assisted in escap-
Ing to Greece (presumably from Bulgaria) to join the organization.
.
40 Subject outlined the tasks of the organization as
follows:
a.
Intelligence activity in Bulgaria,
b.
Bulgaria, and
Organizing an underground resistance movement in
SECRET
CONTROL
U.S. OFFICIALS ONLY
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_55.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
•THIS IS WHAT I AM TRYING TO DO NOW
THE
THE
INTERNATIONAL
_ NEWSPAPER
Film
VOL. 124, NO. 57
DAILY
TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 1964
OF
c
MOTION PICTURES
Established May 8, 1918
TE
COURT THROWS OUT PAY-TV SU
IFFPA Moves for
Free Film Flow
In Seven Nations
Madrid-A united attack on some
of the barriers that prevent a free
flow of motion pictures in seven
nations will be launched by the
International Federation of Film
Producers Associations, Ralph Het-
zel, president of the association and
acting president of the Motion Pic-
ture Association of America, said
here before returning to New York.
(Continued on Page 5)
Mandel Heads Film
Division of UJA Drive
Harry Mandel, president of
RKO Theatres, will serve as
chairman of the Motion Picture
and Amuse-
ment Division
of the United
Jewish Appeal
of Greater New
York.
* "It is most
important for
bur industry,”
Mandel de-
clared "to give
additional sup-
port to UJA in
order that we
may help ease
the problems of
those in need."
MANDEL
Nationwide UJA goal appeal
is $105,000,000.
Museum of Modern Art
May Pass Up NY Festival
The Museum of Modern Art may
not participate in the New York
Film Festival this year, a Museum
spokesman acknowledged yesterday.
He said the question of participa-
tion was yet to be decided by the
(Continued on Page 5).
i
AB-PT Income Rises;
Theatre Take Larger
American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatres showed record income
for 1963 accompanied by a rise in earnings from the theatre division,
President Leonard H. Goldenson disclosed yesterday. The AB-PT
Jacobellis Case Up
To High Court Again
-
Washington Bureau of THE FILM DAILY
Washington The Supreme
Court yesterday set the long-
awaited second argument of the
Nico Jacobellis case for next week.
The second arguments will be heard
just before a book obscenity case,
overall income was $386,729,000
for the year compared to $379,-
741,000 in 1962.
Theatre earnings, not usually re-
vealed, were $76,209,000 for 1963
compared to $75,956,000 in 1962.
Merchandise sales were $29,948,000
(Continued on Page 2)
'Greatest' Campaign
and the decision of the highest Focus on Pictorial
court to listen again may presage a
more sweeping decision on obscen-
ity in motion pictures than has
been handed down in previous
cases.
Cleveland Heights theatre man-
ager Jacobellis was convicted under
(Continued on Page 4)
Jimmy Grainger Heads
Sales for AllStar
-
West Coast Bureau of THE FILM DAILY
Hollywood 1 J. R. "Jimmy"
Grainger, industry veteran who
formerly headed RKO Radio Pic-
tures, is back in action with the
formation here of AllStar Films,
a new distribution production
-
company.
Grainger, one-time Fox and
(Continued on Page 4)
Except for the picture itself the
photography in George Stevens'
"The Greatest Story Ever Told”
will constitute
"the single
greatest selling
tool," according
to United Art-
ists plans.
Gabe Sum-
ner, UA nation-
al director of
advertis-
ing, publicity
and exploita-
tion, said yes-
terday "The
Greatest Story"
promotion
STEVENS
promises to be "the most exten-
(Continued on Page 4) ·
Exhibs Win First
STV Plans Move
Round in Calif.;
By WILLIAM ORNSTE
West Coast Editor of THE FIl
Hollywood Subs
TV lost the first rou
four-round bout in t
fornia arena with the Cr
Free TV. The initial roun
to theatre owners was dis
U.S. District Court Judge
C. Mathis of the $117,541
trust and conspiracy suit
Dec. 17 against the Crusa
'defendants, including thes
(Continued on Page :
Naify Fills Skou
Spot in Magna F
Marshall Naify, presi
United Artists Theatre
and of United California 1
has been elected presi
Magna Pictures Corp. N
the vacancy in Magna en
the death of George P. Sh
Another vacancy cau
Skouras death, the presi
Todd-AQ, has been filled |
Hassanein, United Artis!
tre Circuit Executive Vic
dent.
Naify said that Magna
produced “Oklahoma!” anı
Pacific" would step up its
production in both in Di
150 for roadshow presenta
in 85mm for regular rele
British Box Office Attendance Stronger Greek Gods' to Roll
-
London Both film, box office receipts and attendance for January,
1964, were up over January, 1963. statistics of the Board of Trade here
reveal.
Weekly average theatre take in January, 1964, was £1.24 million com-
pared to £1.08 million. Weekly attendance for January, 1964 was 7.9
million compared to 7.6 million in the s'me month last year. (The pound
is at $2.82).
At $20 Million Bu
Diko Prod., Inc., a new
can-Greek company with
quarters in Athens, plans
duce "The Loves of the
Gods" in Greece and in th
ston Studios in Madrid at
(Continued on Page 2
For Skill
Awal Spr
4. Sigin
And Sound
ISN'T IT TIME YOU CAME HOME TO ROOST AT Pathé
Hollywo
New Yor
Toronto

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_57.jpeg ---
13-00000
TO:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
L
SECRET
20 JAN 1964
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Security
Department of State
Deputy Director for Plans
DINTOFT, Diniter Adamoff
A: DINITROV, Dimitur Adamov]
filem
Reference:
nado
ade to the request rejtved 15
1984 from Mr. Jessup concerning Bubject.
this office contain the following information
2. Subject of your request is Dimitur Adhmew DIMITROV
born 7 May 1924 in Medkovats, Bulgaria. He escaped to
Greece in 1947 and participated actively in anti-Commmist
activities among Bulgarian refugees there. Is van daa
scribed as being dictatorial and egotistical to the point
of having delusions of grandeur. Subject felt that he
could cause: the downfall of the Communist government of
Bulgaria and would become prime minister of the country
thereafter. By September 1951, his behavior had become
so peculiar that he was detained for mental observation
and treatment. In February 1954, Subject was considered
well enough the returned to normal refugee channels in
Greece and was transferred to the Syros refugee detention
camp to await disposition.
3. Subject immigrated to the United States in 1956.
Since that time he has written numerone letters to the
White House and government agencies proposing rather far-
fetched anti-Commmist schemes in which he inevitably
proposes himself for the leading role. Whereas Subject
is not regarded as insane and is not known to be disposed
to violence, the above letters do indicate that he is
something of a "crackpot" on the subject of anti-Communi
It is conceivable that he does harbor name bitterness to
ward Greece as a result of him detention mentioned abov
CSCI–3/779,614
BC: Federal Bureau of Investigation.
RID/CE: JMA/MC/dcl
Based on: 201-45145*.
Endl
EE/BR
201-45145
CS COFILE IN 201-45145
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from, automatisi
-degrading and

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_56.jpeg ---
13-00000
THE
DAILY
Established May 8, 1918
Vol. 124, No. 57, Tues., March 24, 1964 10 Cts.
CHAS, A. ALICOATE :: Edit. in Chief & Pub.
HARRY WISMER: :: Associate Publisher &
Executive Vice-President
:
:
AL FINESTONE :
: Editor
BOONE MANCALL :: Vice-Pres. Dir. of Adv.
WILLIAM SPECHT :: :: Associate Editor
MERLIN LEWIS : : : : Vice-Pres.-Gen. Mgr.
Published daily except Saturdays, Sundays,
and Holidays at 1501 Broadway, New York
36, N. Y., Wid's Films and Film Folk, Inc.
Chas. A. Alicnate, l'resident & Treasurer;
Nelson E. Tarringer, Vice-President & Secre
tary. Second Class postage paid at New York,
N. Y. Terma (Postage free) United States
$15.00 one year. Foreign $20.00.. Address
all communications to THE FILM DAILY,
1501 Broadway, New York 36, N. Y.
Telephones: BRyant 9-7117, 9-7118, 9-7119,
9-7120, 9-7121. Cable Address: Filmday,
New York.
'Becket' Grosses Tops
In First Five Engagaments
Hal Wallis “Becket" shapes up
as one of the top roadshow films
of recent years on the basis of
its first five engagements in the
THE
AB-PT Income Rises;
Theatre Take Larger
(Continued from Page 1)
compared with $75,965,000 in 1962.
The AB-PT operating earnings
for 1963 were $7,358,000 or $1.65 a
share compared to $10,757,000 or
$2.41 a share in 1962.
Goldenson explained the paradox
of lower operating earnings when
the record income exceeded that of
1962 as reflecting 1962-1963 tele-
vision business and the cost of cov-
ering President Kennedy's assas-
• sination. He anticipated progressive
improvement during 1964, better
than 1963.
'
He noted, too, an improvement in
theatre business despite a slow
start in 1963. AB-PT, he said, con-
tinued its policy of disposing mar-
ginal theatres and attempting to
replace them with modern units in
growing suburban areas. The com-
pany, he revealed, dropped 14 thea-
tres during 1963-and opened three
new ones. Theatres are under con-
struction in Charlotte, N.C. and
Sunnyland, Fla., and a third is on
the drawing board.
U.S. and Canada, according to Levy Signs Sandy Oliver
Paramount.
In its second week, at Loew's
State here, “Becket" scored $30,-
070 in six performances. Others
include $16,959, seven shows,
Warner Beverly, Los Angeles;
$11,849, six performances, Chi-
cago Cinestage; $12,370, seven per-
formances, Eglinton, Toronto.
Brandt to West Coast
For 'Weekend' Confabs
Bingo Brandt, vice president of
Brandt Theatres, leaves today for
the West Coast for promotion con-
ferences with Emanuel Barling,
distributor of "Weekend" which
opens at the renovated Globe
Theatre here at the end of April.
Brandt will also discuss picture
possibilities for Lotte Tarp, who
is featured in "Weekend."
July Release
FANNY HILL
PA
To Compose for 'Fanny'
.
DAILY
FINANCIAL
(March 23)
✓ NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE
Net
Close Chg.
144 +
*/*.
High Low
ABC Vending. 14% 14
ABC-Par
36% 35% 36 + 1½
Am. News. ... 23½ 23 23¾ + 1/8
Am. Optical.. 68% 67% 68
Am. Seat..... 35 35 35
Ampex ... 16% 15% 15% + 3.
Auto. Conteen 13% 13%. 13% - ¼
Bausch & Lomb 34½
Bell & Howell. 23%
CBS
431
Columbia Picts. 21%
Decco
..
46%
Disney
.. 45
East. Kadak..129½ 128
Gen. Prec. Eq. 28%
Glen Alden……. 14¼
Lear Siegler: 13%
Litton Indus... 66%
33½ 33½
3/
22% 23%
5's
43
43
14
21%
21%
V/a
46%
44
46% - ½
44% + 1½
128
3/4
28½
28½ -
14%
14% +
13%
13%
Va
65%
65%a -
½
Loew's Thea.. 22 :21%
MCA
MCA CVP.... 36
MGM ... 30% 30
21%
Va
56½
56%
56%
38
35%
35%
+ ¼
30
Nat. General.. 9 ·
Paramount
58
RCA Common. 36%
878
8% -%
57
57% +18
•
35%
36% + ¼
RCA 1st Pfd... 77%
77%
77%
Republic Corp. 7%
7%
734
1
Republic Pfd.. 154 15
Stan. Warner. 26½ ·25%
20th-Fox ..... 22%
United Artists. 25
Warner Bros.. 28%
Zenith Radio..84%
15% +
¼
26½ +
22½
22½
24%
24%
-
27% 27%
83 83
'AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE
Allied Artists. 2% 2% 23
Audio Dv... 12. 12 12%
Cinerama Inc.. 11% 11
11
814 8½ 8½ +
MPO VA...
12% 11% 11%
Reeves Indus.. 3¼ 3
3
Screen Gems.. 194 19 19
Sonotone ……
Technicolor
West Coast Burcau of THE FILM ĎAILY
Hollywood-Robert Levy, pres-
ident of Pebble Productions, has
signed noted song writer and
dramatist Sandy Oliver to write
an original song for the company's Filmways ...
color featurette, "A Comedy Tale
of Fanny Hill", which begins roll-
ing at Producers Studio in April,
starring Judy Cannon. Working
title for the tune is "The Song
of Fanny Hill".
Levy has also set Cy Roth as
production manager for the film
which is aimed for July 4 nation-
wide release.
Batschelet Succeeds
Sweeten as Denver Mgr.
Denver, Colo.-Ralph J. Batsch-
elet, manager of the Mayan Thea-
tre and member of the cabinet of
Fox Inter-Mountain Theatres, has
been named managing director of
the Denver Theatre, according to
Ray W. Davis, area supervisor for
the Fox organization, and John
O. Denman, Denver district man-
ager.
Batschelet succeeds Robert
Sweeten, promoted to national ad-
vertising director for National
General Corp. in Beverly Hills,
Calif., the parent company
Peter Lorre Dead
-
West Coast Burcau of THE FILM DAILY
Hollywood _ Peter Lorre died
here yesterday.. He would have
been 60 in June. The Hungarian-
born actor was known film
audiences for his character roles
in a score of motion pictures, most
recently in a series with Amari-
can International.
'
Va
1/8
½
18
1/2
5575
TV Indus...
18% 17% 17% -
1.3 3/ 3/ 3/4
18
Trans-Lux
-
1
12% 12% 12%
OVER THE COUNTER.
(Supplied by the National Association
of Security Dealers)
Medallion
·Commonwealth Pr.
Du Art Corp.
5%a
41
Bid Asked
612
5
General Drive-In
10%
11%
General Artists Corp.
Mogna Pictures
2
Seven Arts Production
Skiatron
Subscription TV
Universal
7½ 8½
23
163 17
10% 11
214
111
66
8
21/2
2%8
341
36%
UA Reatres
Weifer Reade
ometco
258
128
7012
.
Tuesday, March 24
COMING AND GC
MAX A. COHEN, head of Cinem
and MRS. COHEN returned yester
Europe.
M. J. FRANKOVICH, Columbia F
head, returned to the coast from
Paris and Rome.
BERNARD J. GATES, Allied An
national v.p., has returned from
European trip.
JOSEPH E. LEVINE, Embassy Pict
ident, to Boston on business. H
tomorrow.
MO ROTHMAN, Columbia Inte
executive v.p., returned from Bue
following the company's Latin Ame
vention in Uruguay.
☐ LOU FORMATO, MGM assistan
sales manager, to Scattle and Por
returns Friday.
WILLIAM J. DEVANEY, MGM
division sales manager in Seott!
heading for Portland, Ore.
FRED HYNĖS, Todd-AO vice-pre
the coast, has returned there fr
SHELDON SMERLING, head of B
terprises, returned to the coast
fortnight here on his theatre inter
include Eastern Management hous
SAMUEL TAYLOR, who will ·
screenplay for “Three on a Couc
Irving Pincus production for 1
huddling in Hollywood.
RUTH POLOGE, American ink
eastern publicity director, to Chicc
Producer LAWRENCE TURMAN
turned to the coast after UA tal
lease of "The Best Man.”
DIRK BOGARDE and SARAH I
· turned to London; ditto JOSEPH LC
directed "The Servant," in which
BETTE DAVIS is here from the cc
PETER GLENVILLE, director of H
"Becket," has returned to Loni
N. Y. for tomorrow's premiere at
Theatre.
'Yesterday' Rolls Bi
In New York and I
Joseph E. Levine's "Ye:
Today and Tomorrow," k
the biggest grossing film
Manhattan's. East Side, ac
to Embassy, which repo
expected first week's g
$59,000 at the Festival and
East.
1 x Wilshire, Embassy r
In Los Angeles, the film
$15,304 in first three days
‘Greek Gods' to Roll in '65.
At $20 Million Budget
(Continued from Page 1)
of $20 million."
•
Diko Dimitroff, head of the new
company, has set next January for
start of filming. Financing has
been obtained from a Wall Street
firm, the National Organization
to Assist Small Business.
Shooting on the four-hour wide-
screen production is expected to
take a full year. All exteriors
will be done in Greece and will
involve the use of Mount Olympus
itself.
30.
'Servant' Breaks
Record at Little Ca
Ely Landau's "The S
broke the 30-year record
Little Carnegie with a fir
gross of $20,402, the comp
ports.
'Word' Here Today
"Th Given Word,"
Films release, has its U.
mere today at the Beekm.
catre under auspices of r
Dora A. de Vasconcellos,
General of Brazil.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_59.jpeg ---
13-00000
c.
SECRET
CONTROL
JL.S. OFFICIALS ONLY
Organizing sabotage activity against Bulgaria.
5. Subject also revealed that the members of the committee
at present were: himself as president; Ivan Mitev Hristonov,
secretary; Ivan Donev Ivanov; Dimiter Donev Ivanov; and a fifth
member whose name was not supplied by source.
6. In addressing the group at Lavrion, Subject took
frequent occasion to mention that the committee has its head-
quarters in the American Embassy where he has a room assigned
for his own use. He also stated that the committee maintains
offices at 13 Patission Street, 7th Floor, rooms 2-4, and he
stated that eight Bulgarian-speaking Americans are already work-
ing at this address. Possibly in an effort to impress his
listeners, Subject commented that his office had two Bulgarian
typewriters and a car with U. S. A. license plates.
% Following his address to the group at Lavrion, Subject
and Ivan Mitev Hristonov, secretary of the so-called committee,
prepared a list of prospective members of the organization based
on their screening of the refugees at Lavrion on the basis of
birthplace, education, military training, and similar factors,
the list having been prepared for submission to the American
Embassy for approval, according to Subject.
8. On 1 November 1950, Subject again visited the Lavrion
Camp to inform his recruits that they would shortly be moved to
a pleasant home in Athens which the Americans were repainting
for the purpose. On the occasion of this visit, the recruits
were divided into three groups, as follows:
2.
A group of 10 men to specialize in intelligence,
b.
A group of 6 men to be trained in radio in Germany,
and
A group of 15 men to specialize in sabotage.
9.
C.
On or about 10 November 1950, the following six members
of Group "A" moved to Athens: Peter Zlatev, Krustyu Kiryanov,
Ivan Hristonov, Ivan Gogov, Todor Djadiev, and one whose name is
unknown. The others were to follow shortly.
10. According to our source, the radio group comprises
Ivan Iskrov, Boris Popov, Georgi Nikolov, and others, while the
sabotage group includes Serafim Vangelov Kouyoumdjiev, Nikola
Manev, Todor Nikolov Todorov, Marko Korchev and others.
-
-2-
SECRET
CONTROL
1.S. OFFICIALS ONLY

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_61.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
13 November 1950
Dimiter Adamov Dimitrov
MEMORANDUM FOR: II/OS -
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Request for Operational Clearance for Subject
dated 23 October 1950.
1. Attached is additional biographic data on Subject,
forwarded for your information.
EE-I/CFA/1b
cc: Orig & 1
#3, 4
: 5, 6
-
-
addressee
EE-I
III/RE
Oratian M. Yatsevitch
Chief, EF-I
GRET
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_60.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
CONTROLS
U.S. OFFICIALS ONLY
11. In submitting the above report our source commented
that Kouyoumdjiev is a dangerous Communist, although he did not
cite facts to support this accusation. Our source also described
Subject as an unprincipled opportunist and Greek agent. Accord-
ing to our source, Subject had previously worked for the Greeks
and was in contact with the British last spring.
SO DB-31992
- 3 -
SECRET
CONTROL
U.S. OFFICIALS ONLY
ROBERT A. SCHOW
Assistant Director
Special Operations

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_62.jpeg ---
SECRET
DIMITER ADAMOV DIMITROV
'
Dimiter Adamov Dimitrov was born on 7 May 192h in the village of
Wedkovets, district of Lom, Bulgaria. His father was a farmer. His
primary education was completed in Lom. He finished his high school
training in 1941-1942 in Sofia, and studied philology for one year at
Sofia University (1942-1943).
In 1942 he joined a secret branch of the Bulgarian National Agrarian
Union. In 1943, he claims to have begun underground activities, das to
persecution by "Fascists". On 2 September 1944, he emerged from hiding
to begin work with various Agrarian leaders. After the events of
9 September 1954, however, he again went into hiding and began activities
aimed against Communists,
On 28 October 19hh, he allegedly was accused by the government of
sabotage because he had agitated against the Russian occupation troops.
During the ensuing months, he was arrested several times in Ferdinand,
Vratsa, and Lon. When released from prison, he continued his illegal
activities. His organizational activities often lead him across the
Yugoslav frontier. Allegedly he worked in Vardar Macedonia in order
to organize Bulgarian sympathizers for the Agrarian Party cause. In
April and May 1945, Dimitrov was in Sofia. At one point he procured
an illegal identity card add under the name "Boris Stoikov, a member
of the 2nd Belgrade Shock Brigade", he toured southwestern Yugoslavia,
"organizing Agrarian posts", and was eventually captured by the
Yugoslav authorities and sent back to Bulgaria. During the elections
of 18 November 1945 he spoke at secret mestings in Vratsa, urging the
people to defeat the Communists..
On 16 August 1946, he was captured by the police in Sofia. He
claims to have been kept eighteen days without bread and twelve days
without water, and to have spent four days on an electric torture
machine which caused temporary blindness. From 13 October to
11 November 1946, he was tried in the Vratsa court for having organized
subversive groups all over Bulgaria and sentenced on four counts. On
2 June 1947, he was tried and sentenced to death by the Sofia Military
Court. On 8 July he escaped from the authorities, and on 23 July 1947
he crossed the Greek frontier.
ACTION
He now works for Radio Athens and lives at Hotel New Phaleron,
Greece.
SECRET
00000-ЄL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_64.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
23 October 1950
MEMORANDUM FOR: II/09
SUBJECT:
Operational Clearance for Dimitri Adamov Dimitrov
1. It is requested that the necessary investigation be
initiated for the issuance of an operational clearance for
Dimitri Adamov Dimitrov.
2. Subject will be used in psychological and political
warfare operations in Greece in connection with project QKSTAIR.
Clearance should permit occasional trips to such countries as
Italy, France, Germany, Switzerland, and England.
3. All possible efforts should be made to prevent any
U. S. government or CIA interest being shown in this man. His
usefulness would be severely restricted, if not eliminated, if
it should become known in Bulgarian emigre circles that the U. S.
government was intending to utilize his services.
4. Because of his background and experience subject can make
significant contributions to CKSTATT operations in Greece. He
T
is needed as soon as possible to participate in operations which
are already underway. A provisional clearance is requested for 17 Nov. 1950.
5. All Biographical data available at present is attached.
Attachments: 3
cc: EF-I file
EE-I chrono
OPC file.
OPC chrono
EB-I/MSB/ej
SEGRET
GRATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Chief, EX-I

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_66.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY
:
CC
CONFIDENTIAL
ATHENS 588 October 13, 1950
AIR POUCH
515834
Enclosures: 10 DST-
26
. REC'D
OCT 20
DST-18015
ACTION
EUR*
769.00/10-1350
INFO
State F
DCR
NEA
PERIPHERAL: ACTIVITIES OF DIMITER ADAMOV DIMITROV ("DIKO®) OLI
BULGARIAN REFUGEE PRESENTLY IN GREECK
T
L
R
Dimiter Adamov Dimitrov, a young Bulgarian refugee known EUR/X
as "Diko"; seems to be the most active Bulgarian now in Greece.P
His youth, energy and capabilities indicate that he might be-
come a figure of importance in Bulgarian emigre circles.
report on him is divided into the following sections:
10
Biography
1.
20
Biography
Present activities
a
1. Employment
Publications.
The "Democratic Bloc"
Memorial services for
Nikola Petkov:
Comments
201-45145
This
RETAIN OR DESTROY
The following biographic details were supplied by Dimitres
himself, and cannot be checked in Athe
Dimiter Adamov Dimitrov was born on May His father
7, 1924, in the
village of Medkorers, district of Lon, Bulgaria. His father
was a farmer. His primary education was completed in Lem. He
finished his high school training in 1941-1942 in Sofia, and
studied philology for one year at Sofia University (1942–1943).
In 1942 Diko joined a secret branch of the Bulgarian
National Agrarian Union. In 1943, he claims to have begun
derground activities, due to persecution by "Fascists.” He
claims to have worked closely with (Dr) G. M.Dimitrov during
the time. (This claim is partially substantiated by letters
written to Diko by Dr. G. M. Dimitrov in 1947.)
On September 2, 1944, Dike emerged from hiding to begin
work with the Mushanov, Guit chev, Moraview Agrarians. After
the events of September 9, 1944, however, he again went into
hiding and began activities aimed against Communists.
Wallan:vg
IID COPY
201-45145,
1
1431042
-30-
y
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_63.jpeg ---
13-00000
JIUNAL LCNICK LUFT
.
"
RMATION:
RELATED
WASH-
: PART-G FRAN
::/ATHE
3200
GKSTAIR.
FLAKES HAVE AGREED MY USE OF LYLE O KELLY
().
ICENTITY-CE.
LATTER HAS GIVEN ME NAMES SIX HIS FOLLOWERS
1. IN READY TO INFILTRATE IMMEDIATELY.
FLAKES NOW
(4).
CLEARING. FIRST TASK ONE TE TO BRING OUT THINK WE
NAVE SEZETHING SOOD HERE. DE ARE ALL SET. REQUEST IMMED FATE.
GO AHEAD CASIS OUR LOCAL AND FLAKO CLEARANCE TO GET THIS
FLARE
HAETOFORE DOCEED DOWN SHOW ON ROAD.
• A SUPPLY TRAINED SABOTEURS, NOT NOW IN
FLAKS, SEST FOR TRAINING JOCS IN HTSTEIN, OTHERS FOR OPS.
WILL INFORM FURTHER.
ALSO REQUEST CLEARANCE ROSE, KELLYS LOCAL LIEUTENANT.
NOTE KELLY HAD BEEN UNDER CLOSE 24 HOUR PER DAY
SURVEILLANCE SINCE 14 0970859.
EXPERIENCED
DERGRO
S SIX
WORKER

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_65.jpeg ---
13-00000
CRET
www
BIOGRAPHICAL DATA
DEMNTROV, Dimitri Adamov
Dimitrov was born in Ferdinand, now Mihailongrad, in 1924. There is
little information about his youth but it appears he is fairly well educated.
Ila was an active Albanian Agrarian at a young age. During the war he worked
illegally in Greek Macedonia and Vardar, Macedonia to escape authorities.
He returned home after the wart soon disillusioned by Communists, went to
Sofia for help from Agrarian headquarters. He then made clandestine tour of
various Albanian cities and towns urging Agrarians to take positive action
against Communists. Finally captured in Sofia, he was given usual treatment
and says life was spared because he was being groomed as witness against
Petkaov. Escaped to Greece, where he has remained since, doing occasional
propaganda for Creaks under non de plume Diko. Subject was strong Georges M.
Dimitrov man but has now veered to Teney group, and is anti-Dimitrov.
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_67.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY
CONFIDENTIAL
"
(1
·C C
☐ CENS 588
i
On October 28, 1944, he allegedly was accused by the govern-
ment of sabotage because he had agitated against the Russian
occupation troops. During the ensuing months he was arrested
several times in Ferdinand, Vratsa and Lom. When released from
prison, he continued his illegal activities, which seem to have
consisted in travelling from village to village, organizing
loose-knit groups of Agrarians to withstand Communist pressures.
Diko's organizational activities often lead him across the
Yugoslav frontier. Allegedly he worked in Vardar Macedonia in
order to organize Bulgarian sympathizers for the cause of Dr.
G. M. Dimitrov, and upon the advice of a certain General
Kitchharov.
In April and May, 1945, Diko was in Sofia, in contact with
Dr. G. M. Dimitrov, Nikola Petkov and Mara Raicheva. After Diko
learned that GeMe had left Bulgaria, he went to Skoplja and
asked American and English officers there to help him get to
Bari. He did not receive such help.
-
Diko procured an illegal identity card and, as "Boris
Stoikov, a member of the 2nd Belgrade Shock Brigade, # he toured
southwestern Yugoslavia, "organizing Agrarian posts." Eventually
Diko was captured by the Yugoslav authorities.
Upon the suggestion of "Gosho, the leader of the partisans
of Greek Macedonia," Diko was sent back to Bulgaria. He escaped
during this transfer and, although he was ill, he went to Sofia
where, he says, he was helped by a number of people, including
Peter Belgashki, an American Colonel named "Bekeles, an
American Sergeant named "Bucky," General Craig and Mrs. Minnie
Balabanova.
When he had recovered his health, Diko left Sofia and
travelled throughout Bulgaria, organizing "secret posts.”
Allegedly he organized 250 of these throughout Bulgaria. During
the elections of November 18, 1945, he spoke at secret meetings
in Vratsa, urging the people to defeat the Communists.
On August 16, 1946, he was captured by the police in Sofia.
He claims to have been kept eighteen days without bread and
twelve days without water, and to have spent four days on an
electric torture machine which caused temporary blindness.
(His "indescribable tortures" are all described in detail in his
book "The Liberation of Bulgaria." See enclosure No. 1.) Diko
believes that he was not executed because the Communists wished
to hold him as a witness in preparation for the trial of Nikola
Petkov.
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_7.jpeg ---
150
30 April 1950 (date of information)
.
The Bulgarians at Lavrion Camp established a new political organization
known as the "P. D. Petkov Organization". The member, who are listed
in the protocol (attached to the report), have deserted the Bulgarian
Agrarian Party in an effort to retain their "pure" agrarian character.
In the opinion of the Petkov Organization, the Agragrian Party has been
penetrated by the leftists. Protocol signed on 30 April 1950.
DIMITROV's name appears as a member of the Board of Control.
SO 48993, 16 September 1950

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_68.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY: CONFIDENTIAL
C C
CHENS 588
From October 13 to November 11, 1946, Diko was tried in
the Vratsa court for "having organized subversive groups all
over Bulgaria." The chief prosecutor was a man named Chernew,
the presiding judge was a certain Pencho Spasov. Diko was
sentenced on four counts: to death, to 15 years, to 6 years and
to 3 years imprisonment. He was jailed and put in solitary
confinement.
On June 2, 1947, he was tried and sentenced to death by
the Sofia Military Court. Also, he states, he was tried and
sentenced to death by the court at Lom.
In June, 1947, Diko was taken to a quarry in Vratsa where
he worked loading rock. On July 8, he escaped from the quarry
and went to Mesdra. In Mesdra he contacted the post which he
had established there, and received help in travelling further.
He went to Zverova and then to Sofia. While in Sofia he asked
for and received some help both from the British and from the
Americans. He claims that on one occasion he slept in the Sofia
house of Jack Horner, of the American Legation. (At this time
Mr. Horner was living in his summer home at Simeonovo.) Dike
claims also to have stayed with Michael Shipkov.
On July 23, 1947 he crossed the Greek frontier south of
Zlatograd. He gave himself up the next day at Shahim.
-
British authorities in Sofia had notified the British in
Salonika, and they made arrangements for Diko to be admitted
to the British hospital in Xanthi. After eighteen days in
the hospital there he was transferred to the British hospital
in Salonika. After a month and a half in Salonika he was sent
to Athens. Greek authorities sent him to the refugee camp at
Lavrion. Dike spent nine months in Lavrion then went to Athens
where he obtained employment broadcasting in Bulgarian on Radio
Athens. His subsequent activities in Greece are discussed in
section 2, below.
.
Diko speaks Bulgarian, Serbian, Russian, some Greek and
a very little English.
2.
Activities
a. Employment. Diko works for Radio Athens. He broadcasts
every Sunday evening in Bulgarian. He receives 30,000 drachmae
per broadcast. (60,000 if his text is also used in a Greek
language broadcast.) Unfortunately, however, it costs him twenty
to thirty thousand drachmae to have his text translated inte
Greek for the benefit of the Greek censor. Additional expenses
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_69.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY: CONFIDENTIAL C
:
OTHER
THENS 588
such as those for renting a typewriter and local transporta-
tion costs, give him a net return from this work of about zero
drachmae. In addition to his money pay, however, the Greek
Government provides him with quarters in a run-down hotel in
New Phaleron and it pays him 2800 drachmae per day subsistence.
(Generally, a refugee is not entitled to subsistence money if
he has any employment whatosever.)
.
-
Diko also writes articles for various Athens newspapers
(sea enclosure No. 6) and has received money for them. Other
literary activities are described in section 2. b., below.
..
A.Mr. Humphries, technical adviser of the BBC at Radio
Athens, allegedly has offered Diko a job with BBC in London.
Diko has refused to accept this offer to date, because of his
primary interest in organizing refugees into a "Democratie
Bloc."
Should he find it impossible to acquire funds necessary
for his continued activities in Greece, however, he plans to
go to London with BBC.
b. Publications. Diko is a prolific author and is at
present writing an eight part work on Bulgaria to be entitled
"Under the Whip of Stalin." The eight parts of the book are:
NH
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(6)
(7)
(8)
•
The Liberation of Bulgaria
In the Hands of the Militia.
Justice and Communism
Prisons and Camps
Agrarians and Communism
Workers and Communism
.
Army and Communism
Church and Communism
Dike has already written parts 1, 5 and 7. Parts 1 and 5
have been published in Greece. They are enclosures No. 1 and
No. 2 to this despatch. Part 7 (enclosure No. 3) is being pub-
lished by the Greek General Staff and is at the printers at the
present time. Diko received about 3,000,000 drachmas for each
part of his book which has been published; he expects to earn
about the same amount for Part 7, and for subsequent parts.
Diko states that he has written the books which have been
published "for the Greek audience." He realizes that they will
not meet approval in the West, largely because they are too
emotional. Also, he has omitted from the Greek versions of
his book certain anti-Monarchist sentiments which he did not
express "for political reasons." Diko has re-written the first
two parts of his book "for the American audience" and is very
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_72.jpeg ---
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
CC
✓. HENS 588
SECURITY :
throws some light on the activities of the Taner clique and
the Barey brothers.
d. Memorial Services for Nikola Petkov. On Saturday,
September 23, 1950, Diko organized a memorial service in Lavrion,
commemorating the third anniversary of the hanging of Nikola
Petkov. Diko stated that about eighty refugees came to his
church service. (Pictures of the occasion, see enclosure No. 10,
indicate that about sixty were present.) The majority of the
people in attendance were Bulgarians, but there were also a few
refugees of other nationalities, a Greek priest and sacristan,
and a few town officials.
The memorial service lasted for more than an hour and in-
cluded a mass, and a speech by Dike. Diko claims that his
speech was so moving that all of the refugees cried, including
himself. Following the service, Diko laid a wreath at the town
soldier's monument and the group repaired to a tavern for re-
freshments.
The cost of the memorial service, indicated below, was not
inconsiderable. Diko states that he paid about half of it him
self, and that the other half was paid for from collections
among the refugees.
COST OF MEMORIAL SERVICE
100,000 drachmas
110,000
Lo Wreath
2.
Priest
3.
Wine
40,000
4.
Finvo.
Ceremonial wheat-and-sugar
200,000
Candles
100,000
Food and drink at tavern
320.000
870,000
It is interesting to note that no Gemetoists took part in
or attended the memorial service. This was claimed by Dike, and
corroborated by a Gametoist who visited the Embassy early in
October to complain about the "high-handed audacity of Diko in
pretending to speak for Democracy." (Note: The Peripheral
Reporting Unit had been invited to attend the Memorial Service
but did not do so since it did not wish to appear to sponser
one refugee group as against another.)
3. Comments
Dike is a pleasant, hard working young man of average
intelligence. He shows a politician's glibness which is extra-
ordinary in a man of his age. He can talk for hours about
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_71.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY: CONFIDENTIAL
C C
6 ATHENS 588
"
The basic program of Diko's Democratic Bloc is to be found
in the "Constitution of the Bulgarian National Agrarian Union,"
as published in Sofia in 1922. Diko carries an old and dog-
eared copy of this publication with him. Presumably a copy is
available in Washington.
In addition to these basic tenets, Diko's group has evolved
a supplementary program. The points of this supplementary pro-
gram are listed on enclosure No. 8. In general, Diko's program ap-
pears democratic and idealistic.
Diko's group is opposed unalterably to the Bulgarian National
Committee and to Dr. G. M. Dimitrov. Diko states that, although
he worked with Dr. Dimitrov for many years, he has come to realize
that Dr. Dimitrov is guilty of those same totalitarian and ter-
rorist leftist practices of which the Communists are guilty.
Diko states that the final break with Dr. Dimitrov came over the
following incident:
Dr. G. M. Dimitrov knew that Diko had orga-
nized many secret posts throughout Bulgaria
and, after Diko escaped from Bulgaria, Dr.
Dimitrov asked Diko to name the posts.
Diko thought it wise not to write down the
names of the persons in charge of the posts,
and was also suspicious of this request.
When Dr. Dimitrov did not receive the infor-
mation he wanted, he became very angry and
"showed his true totalitarian hand."
'
-
(Diko has made available to the Peripheral Reporting Unit
many of his files, including those on his correspondence with
Dr. Dimitrov. It appears that he does know GeMe and that GeMe
at one time thought well of Diko. For instance, in a letter
dated October 31, 1947, Dr. Dimitrov spoke of Diko as a "hero"
and in a letter dated January 2, 1948, Dr. Dimitrov stated
that he had sent Dike some clothing and shaving equipment.)
X.ME 201-652
-
ing
At the present time, Diko is collaborating with the Paris
group of Toncho Tenev and Vakrel Yanev. (The four Bulgarians
in Lavrion who stated that they supported Toncho Tenew See
Athens despatch 380, September 1, 1940 seem to be Dike's
men now.) Diko makes it very clear, almost illogically and
stubbornly clear, that he will continue to work with Toncho
Teney only so long as Tenev does not change his present program.
Diko seems to suspect that Teney might later evince "Monarchist*
or "Gemetoist" tendencies.
Kanke::D:D
✓ Diko corresponds with Toncho Tenev,, Vakrel Yanev and Yanko DGNEV
and Chetcho Doney in France, with GrosiuXDaney and (Lt. Coll
Nikola Alexandrov in Italy, with Panayot Panayeter in Venezuela,
and with other Bulgarian refugees. Enclosure No. 8 is a trans-
lation of part of the text of a letter from Vakrel Yanev, which
CONFIDENTIAL
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_70.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY: CONFIDENTIAL
G
THENS 588
Enclosures
anxious to have them published in the United States.
No. 4 and No. 5 are the Greek texts of these revised portions.
."
Diko refers to himself often as "the new Kravchenko – better
than Kravchenko." The Peripheral Reporting Unit asked Mrs. Mary:
Johnston, former Press Attache at the United States Legation in
Sofia, to read the Greek text of Diko's books and check on this
boast. (Diko's books are available only in Greek at the present
time.) Mrs. Johnston stated that "Diko is certainly no worse
than Kravchenko."....Mrs. Johnston believes that Diko is an inte
resting and graphic author and that if he could abstain from
frequent use of Balkan epithets his work might merit publica-
tion in English. Mrs. Johnston selected a short passage from
"Agrarians and Communism" as being typical of his better writing.
Enclosure No. 6, "Incident in Vulchedram," is a translation of
this passage.
webytes Adamos
"BULGARIAN
c. The "Democratic Bloc." Diko is engaged in trying to
organise a "Democratic Bloc." "His present efforts are directed
almost entirely toward Bulgarian refugees in the camp at Lavrion.
Diko was made a member of the "P. D. Petkov" organization which
was formed in Lavrion on April 30, 1950. (See CAS report E-3295
September 16, 1950.) He has taken over and expanded the acti-
vities of this group, and now considers himself its leader.
Dike claims that he has twelve "hard core" members in his
group and fifty-four interested supporters. He claims that he
will have ninety supporters as soon as he can find the funds to
print and distribute his program, and to provide other concrete
proofs of his growing strength.
Diko appears to be an excellent organizer. He keeps
up-to-date lists of all the Bulgarians in the camp at Lavrion.
The Bulgarians are listed according to Diko's estimate of their
political position. Thus, there is a group called Supporters,
there is one called Potential Supporters, there is a group of
"hard core" Gemetoists, a list of Nationalists, etc. Diko
also files all of his ideas and correspondence and, in general,
seems to have a good idea of what he has done and is doing.
Diko makes it a point to visit the camp at Lavrion regu–
larly, and to bring with him cigarettes and food which he dis-
tributes among new arrivals. Allegedly, he tells these new
arrivals that the presents are given to them because they are
Bulgarians, not as a bribe to join his political group. "In
actual fact, however," Dike admits, "this is a very successful
way of getting people to support us.' Diko claims that he pays
for these little gifts himself; he emphatically denies having
received outside help in this matter.
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_73.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY :
CONFIDENTI AL
CCXHENS
_THENS 588
"Democracy, "our program," etc., without actually saying
anything, yet creating the impression that he is all-knowing.
As an example of Diko's awareness of the politician's
role, it might be mentioned that he now wears a well cut suit
of the finest materials, a pair of excellent imported shoes,
a silk shirt and a silk tie. Diko is buying these on crediť,
at 150,000 drachmae ($10) per month. He claims that a good
appearance is necessary if he is to inspire the confidence and
cooperation of the refugees among whom he is working.
:
Dike is a rugged individualist and it would seem that his
individualism is his greatest enemy at present. He is intole-
rant and suspicious of others, and is the type of person who
would prefer to lead his own small group to suicide than to
follow as a private in a larger army whose aims were not exactly
his own.
There is a very great deal of the charlatan about Diko.
CAS spoke with him on two occasions, and then discarded him as
a "phony." The Peripheral Reporting Unit believes, however,
that, notwithstanding his superficiality and the exaggerations
to which he is prone, Diko has such an intuitive grasp of the
rudiments of political deportment and showmanship, and he is
so devoted to his self-appointed task of organizing his "Demo-
cratic Bloc," that he might become an important Bulgarian figure.
.
Rohut B Memmingen
Robert B. Memminger,
First Secretary of Embassy
10 Enclosures:
(Listed on page 9.)
Copies to:
(less enclosures 1,2,3,4,5,6, and 10)
Paris (PR)
Rome (PR)
Vienna (PR)
Istanbul (PR)
Frankfort (PR)
Trieste (PE).
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_75.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
SECURITY:
Enclosur
7 to ATHENS 588,
October 13, 1950.
"INCIDENT IN VULCHEDRAM”
Excerpt from Agrarians and Communism, by Dimiter Adamov Dimitrov
So one day Yamkov ... (was)... told to go to the "Committee.
The invitation was made personally by Tinko so that it would
not have the meaning and character of an order. (He was the
father of a Communist who probably had an important post in the
capital.)
"We have missed you, Yamkov, we see nothing of you."
"Oh, well, business you know."
"Why don't you come to the office of the People's Committee
so that we can sit and have a talk?"
"To the office? What would I be doing there?”
"Oh, having a talk."
"What do we have to talk about?"
"Well, as men and as fellow villagers we have much to
talk about."
Fellow villagers? Yamkov felt his blood boiling and
rising to his head. That expression "fellow villagers" struck
his ears as an irony, as an insult. He felt he was being de-
filed by the mouth of that sordid murderer; because it was
against these fellow villagers that his mania and extremism
had been directed and his fellow villagers had been killed on
his instructions; killed by the rabid mob of the Party during
its first onslaught. And among these fellow villagers whom
this jackal had killed there were his friends: the kind priest,
the teacher and the doctor, all those who were the heart and
mind of the village.
"
"Like fellow villagers?”
"Anyway, like friends. ... I want to discuss something
with you.
It's necessary that I should have a talk with you.”
"Now I understand. That's right, be blunt about it. At
what time do you order me to be in your office?"
_

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_74.jpeg ---
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL C C
SECURITY":
1. " Oi åεε
2. "
åñɛɛvôɛpurai
ENCLOSURES
.ENS 588.
the Boulyapias" (Part 1-Greek version.
1 copy only. Unclassified.)
*Aуpótes xai no " (Part 5. Greek version. 1 copy
only. Unclassified.)
3. " Oi 'PwoooL ELEVOEPWtés" (Part 7. Greek version. 1 copy only.
Unclassified.)
40
5. "
6.
70
8.
9.
10.
"Outpos Boulуapixós Σxpаtós" (Part 1. Revised text. 1 copy
only. Unclassified.)
'Aуpótes xai Koppo sos" (Part 5. Revised text. 1 copy
only. Unclassified.)
Sexy newspapers containing
Six newspapers containing articles about or by Diko. (1
copy only. Unclassified.)
"Incident in Vulchedram," translation of excerpt from
Diko's "Agrarians and Communism." (Unclassified.)
Program of the "Democratic Bloc." (Confidential.)
Text of letter from Vakrel Yanev to Diko, dated April 15,
1950. (Confidential.).
Seven photographs of Diko and the 1950 Nikola Petkov Memorial
Service at Lavrion. (1 copy only of each. Restricted.)
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_76.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
CURITY :
020
Enclosur
Closur
ATHENS 588
"But don't take it that way, Yamkov. I am not ordering
you, I'm inviting you."
"Okay, when do you want me to come?”
"Come this afternoon, unless you'd prefer tomorrow.
"Either today or tomorrow makes no difference to me
I'm coming this afternoon.
Before going there, Yamkov passed by the druggist's,
the only survivor of the circle of intellectuals, and told him
about the invitation Tinko had made to him. He was the only
man with whom he spoke with confidence and with whom he ex-
changed ideas. The druggist rose, shocked, from his desk,
affixed his spectacles with hands which were trembling, then
put his hands on Yankov's shoulders as if they were expressing
his love and anxiety.
"Be careful, my friend Yankov. You are a bit hotheaded
and cannot control your tongue. Mind you don't misbehave.
Control your nerves, because we mustn't lose you. We need you
we need you. Your home and your family and your village need
you. You must not be missing when the moment arises..
Yamkey left, greatly moved, and with a decision to listam
to whatever they had to tell him at the People's Committee
without expressing the disgust and indignation he felt for
them. He had decided to be patient, to swallow his tongue,
and to listen quietly to all the filth of that social disgrace,
Tinko, like a little pupil of the elementary school who is
chastised by his master.
"The devil take him!" he spat with disgust.
At the People's Committes, apart from the two "eminent”
Party members - Tinko and Yaney
Tinko and Yaney - there was a Russian organi-
zer, a large brute with an elephant neck and with a well-
shaved Asiatic head. Through his large nostrils, which
rhythmically closed and opened with his breathing, one felt
and his
that one was about to see the size of his mind. It seemed
that he knew who Yamkov was, because his grey eyes were COP
stantly fixed on him, insistently and inquiringly. Tinko
introduced him.
"He has a son too, a Party man, our man.
"Bravo, congratulations. Where is he now?” he asked.
"In ... (he felt like saying, Hell) ... Sofia," he
corrected himself.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_8.jpeg ---
13-20200
* October 1950
The QKSTAIR Field Chief learned of DIMITROV through the local peripheral
reporting officer and contacted him covertly. DIMITROV made six agents
immediately available for infiltration operations.
ATHE 3200 (IN 46672), 25.10.50; Memorandum for the Record, 9.5.51

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_77.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY :
a
UNCLASSIFIED
"Is he studying?"
030
Encio Cre
7. ATHENS 588
"Yes, he is studying to become a doctor." (He thought to
himself: "a loafer.")
"Fine," remarked the Russian with satisfaction. "In our
set-up we respect doctors, just as we respect every scientist.
We think highly of them. We give them the means to promote
their science for the benefit of the whole and, of course, for
their own benefit too.”
"Yes, yes. You love them. I have seen that with my own
eyes," agreed Yamkov, scarcely managing to control himself.
And there passed before his eyes the tragic scene of the assas-
sination of the doctor a few days ago.
After these words had been exchanged and he was sitting
comfortably on his chair, the Russian opened his legs wide,
assumed a serious air, and started the discussion. He spoke
Bulgarian with great ease, like a Bulgarian.
"The comrades," he said, pointing to Tinko and Yanev,
"spoke to me with flattering words about you and your home.
You are an honest and industrious family, respectable persons,
and such persons who know how to appreciate work and honesty
are valuable and dear to us. It is even more fortunate
because, as I was told, you are on our side. This is only
too natural, of course, since you have your son....”
"My son has his own ideas and I have mine," interrupted
Yamkov, who had started growing angry.
The Russian pretended not to notice the meaning of the
interruption.
-
"Yes, I understand. Your son, being younger and more
progressive, went further ahead. Youth has the lead. So
I was about to say...what was I saying? Oh yes, that you
have a son who could go ahead if you, too, helped, and if
you didn't it would be the other way. You understand what I
mean?"
Yamkov felt that he was choking with anger, but he con-
trolled himself. He swallowed his tongue.
"I understand," he said, between clenched teeth.
"It's good to hear that," added the Russian. "It shows
that you understand things in the right way, from the proper
angle, like a reasonable man and like a father." He looked

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_78.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY :
UNCLASSIFIED
040
Enclosure 7 ATHENS 588
satisfied. He thought that he had scared Yamkov with his
threatening insinuation. He thought that he had him now at
his mercy.
"And now let us speak about the specific and interesting
question for which we invited you."
"Let us speak," the other man agreed.
"People like you are valuable for us. You are exactly
what is required in each village to serve as an example to
be followed by others, to overcome the stupid hostility of
the villagers toward our social system and thus to facilitate
its completion. Such persons offer an immense service to
our cause.That is why we give them our respect and our
confidence, and we reward them richly, both morally and mate-
rially. We know how to honor honest men.
"Yes, indeed. I can see that," said Yamkov and threw a
glance at the other two "honest men," Yanev and Tinke.
Yamkov's highly expressive hint did not escape the at-
tention of the Russian, but he pretended not to understand.
The two "honest men" went red to the roots of their ears and
their eyes sparked with anger.
"After all this," the Russian went on, "the only thing
that remains is for me to tell you about my proposal. You
should enter the kolkhoz. There you will be able to develop
all your activity, you will benefit the social whole and you
will create the fundamental pre-requisites for the proper
development and progress of your son."
And,
Yamkov rose. From the first words the Russian organizer
had uttered he understood what he was about to come to.
of course, he did not intend to accept the proposal for
participation in the kolkhoz but had intended - following the
advice of his friend, the druggist to express his refusal
in quiet and well chosen words. But when the Russian had
made his son's progress dependent upon his own consent to be-
come an organ of the party thus indirectly blackmailing
him -, and especially when he clearly intimated that he wanted
him to use as the bait for his fellow villagers, his honest
and pure soul revolted. The wave of anger which he- scarcely
managed to control broke out like a torrent. The druggist's
prescription was cast away, forgotten.
"It seems to me," he replied, "that your affinity with
base individuals like Tinko and Yanew, and undoubtedly with
others still worse, has led you to believe that all the

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_80.jpeg ---
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
SECURITY :
8 ATHENS 588
Enclosu
35
October 13, 1950
PROGRAM OF THE DEMOCRATIC BLOC
1. The program is based upon the policies of the great
Agrarians such as Nikola Petkov, Dimiter Guitchev, Nikola
Mushanov, Constantin Moraview, Verdil Dimov, Alexander
Gerginov and Alexander Stambouliski.
:
20 The Bloc accepts the help and collaboration of all
Bulgarian anti-Communists who agree to work along the path
of Democracy.
3. The Bloe refuses to collaborate with Communists,
Leftist elements of any type such as the party of Dr. G. M.
Dimitrov, extreme Rightists, former Monarchists, Fascists,
or with the Ivan Mihailov group. This Democratic Bloc must
remain purely democratic, in the American manner.
4. The Bloc will ally itself with similar bloes now
being formed among Albanian and Yugoslav refugees.
50 As soon as the Bloc can procure the necessary funds,
it will prepare and publish protocols, resolutions, etc.,
and distribute these both to Bulgarian emigrants abroad and
to Bulgarians inside Bulgaria. The first of these brochures
will explain what the Bloc is, what it wants and why it does
not support Dr. G. M. Dimitrov. The brochure will ask for
the help of all Democratic Bulgarians.
6. "After the Bloc has proved itself", it will request
help from the United States and from the Greek Government in
penetrating and propagandizing Bulgaria.
7. The Bloc expects to help annoy the Communists in
Bulgaria and when the time comes to help liberate the
country.
8. When the country has been freed the Bloc desires
free elections under a democratic system, restoration of all
personal freedoms, the adoption of a bill of rights along the
American system, the restoration of private ownership, the
abolition of cooperative farms and the abolition of the
people's courts.
9. The program advocates just and proper trials of all
Communist leaders -- no terrorism.
10. In external affairs the Bloc advocates, Balkan coope-
ration and cooperation with all democratic peoples.
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_79.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY :
UNCLASSIFIED
050
Enclosur ATHENS 588
Bulgarians are tailored to fit your plans. For otherwise
you would not have spoken to me about moral and material
rewards for my person, about coins of treachery, and you
wouldn't have threatened me with the 'development' of my
good-for-nothing son. Oh no, Mr. Russian, you are wrong
in thinking that all the Bulgarians take after your
'comrades" There are a few who cannot be bought, who do
not give way to threats and do not become bait."
-
He put on his hat and left with dignity.
The others remained there, stupified and spellbound,
looked at the departing Yamkov.
When he had overcome the surprise which had stupified
him, Tinko got hold of his revolver and hastened to reach
Yancho Yamkov, who was descending the stairs without being
aware of this. But the Russian organizer stopped him.
"No nonsense. This isn't the time for it. We shall
think over how and when and where it must be done.”
And he did think about it. A few days later Yamkov was
found dead in a field outside the village. He had been
stabbed with wild ferocity.
...
Tinko and the militia made every effort to find the mur
derers. And they found them. They were two peasants, two
stolid and incorrigible anti-Communists, who, according to
their own 'confession'
'confession', written and signed before the militia,
had committed the murder because they were informed that
Yamkov had registered for participation in the kolkhos and
because he insistently and persistently had urged his fellow
villagers to join him. The two-murderers were taken away
for trial and never reappeared.
Yamkov's belongings, in accordance with a statement which
he had "signed," were taken over by the kolkhoz.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_82.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY
CONFIDENTIAL
020
ENCLOSU 9 ATHENS 588
You had promised me that you would send me documentation
on the bad activity of the Barevites in Greece but up to now
you haven't done it, which has troubled me. You know that I
am very strong on promises. I believe the declarations you
have made more than once and shall await the fulfillment as
quickly as possible of these promises.
I had read in the papers about the killing of Marin and
others. I'd like to have you acquaint me with the circum-
stances of the emigrants and what are the fronts, which faces
come out as leaders, what kind of attitude they take, ate.
CONFIDENTIAL
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_81.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECURITY :
CONFIDENTIAL
Enclosure::_:_:(:(:) to ATHENS 588,
October 13, 1950.
Letter from Vakrel Yanev, 37, Rue de Berne, Paris 8, France,
to Dimiter Adamov Dinotrov, Hotel Action, New Phaleron, Greece,
dated April 15, 1950.
EXCERPT
:
.....I am here concentrating more on organizational work
so that we can safeguard the idealistic purity of the Agrarian
Union so heavily stepped upon and frightened by the self-willed
and evil activity of the Doctor and those who circle around him.
Here in Paris we finally have an Agrarian Union and we have
published a circular letter in which we announce in a clear
manner the division among the emigrants. I sent you some of
these letters and an now again sending you one so that you can
distribute it wherever necessary and to people who are interested.
I will await your prompt advice as to how it is received. I
know how the Barey people will receive it, but now this means
nothing to us. The Bulgarian problem in its entirety interests
us and we will not allow it to be misused on account of our
National cause.
.
I have not started a newspaper yet, but everything has
been thought out and I hope that early next month I can re-
lease the first issue. It is not easy. You know how poor we
are and it is hard to get money from the poor emigrants.
Newsprint is very expensive here. My material circumstances
are not any better than before. The newspaper has been thought
out in its serious form and contents; so many people will have
to swallow their tongues.
About the National Committee: I have nothing in common
with them. My opinion is that all in a very short time will
be reorganized from the roots, if we honestly desire to do
good for our enslaved homeland.
for
fornition
TSENTO
BAREY CO.L
The temporary leadership of the Bulgarian Agrarian Union
in exile has been formed to include Eng./Tenew, as also Dinko
*Argirov. The fight with the Barsvites has started strongly
and even though Dr. Dimitrov is on their side we shall con-
tinue the fight, and will not stop, because it is for the pure,
honest triumph of overrun Democracy.
•
The activity on the part of the Barevites about which you
wrote is this: they want to make a sub-committee and for this
purpose they want Slavi Neikov as a representative. You see
to what low levels they have reached and who are the leaders
for the Doctor! I wonder why up to now the emigrants in Greece
have not organized and picked out a committee there, which will
promulgate common interests and not allow outside interference.
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_83.jpeg ---
13-00000
MEMORANDUM
To:
Oliver G. Martell
From:
Terence U. Nasmith
Subject:
The Hanging of Lyle O. Kelly.
CC
18 April 1951
-1.
The most serious accusation against Kelly is based upon
the developments regard to Kelly's connection with the French.
He told us about recent contacts he made with Pierre and Mrs.
Florimond from Salonika. He denied that he had ever had con-
tacts with them previously. We have learned from Ogive that,
in 1979, Kelly worked for Florimond..
'
On Thursday April 12 Kelly stated that he was to tell
Florimond by Friday, April 13, whether or not he would work with
him. Kelly asked us for instructions. We told Kelly his answer
was to be a definite, final no. In other words he was never to
see the French again. We know definitely, however, that Kelly
saw Florimond on Friday, on Saturday and on Tuesday. On Tuesday
he saw also a certain French Assistant Military Attache named Piray.
Yani Kolomonos, Kelly's friend, stated that Kelly has
agreed to meet Piray at the French Embassy between 11 and 12 o'clock
on Thursday, April 19. At this meeting Kelly will (1) give the
Frenchman detailed accounts of all U. S. intelligence operations of
which he is aware, with special emphasis on Radio Gorianin, and (2)
receive for this information 10 to 15 million drachmae.
:
It is imperative that this meeting be stopped.
For
0
instance, two of the Dreamer radio announcers are known to Kelly
and hated by Kelly. Since they have relatives inside Dreamland, their
our position should be as secure as possible.
.
Our Greek informant suggests, not without plausibility,
that this effort of the French might be Communist inspired attempt
to penetrate U. S. intelligence activities. The Greek bases his
guess only upon the reasoning that normal French intelligence activities
would not be so interested in penetrating U. S. work, since
allegedly we are close allies.
2. We accuse Kelly also of manyyproven lies and of theft of
funds. These malpractices, known to us through personal observation
over a period of several months, include such things as the following
2. Kelly stated that he wrote three books, for which he
was paid a sum of money. He did not write the books as he
himself has testified on the enclosed photostat of a document
which he signed.
b. On one occasion
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_84.jpeg ---
13-00000
CE
-
CC
2 -
b. On one occasion Nasmith personally gave Kelly $300
in dollars for an option on his books. Kelly signed a
receipt for this. Kelly showed a signed copy of the receipt
to the true author, stating that he could not divide the
money with the author since, although he had signed the
receipt, he had not received any money that Mr. Nasmith
had forced him to sign the receipt so that Nasmith could
steal the $300 for himself.
C.
Money given to Kelly specifically for the purpose of
paying salaries to the members of his Committee was not
turned over to the Committee in its entirity. Kelly stated on
several occasions definitely that he no longer had any
connections with Greek authorities. At the time he was making
these statements he was observed by our people to be going into
the Aliens Directorate, Radio Athens, and other official Greek
residences. (Note: We wereppàeasedtto have Kelly maintain
contact with Greek officials; we dislike only his lying about
it.)
:
d. On at least 4 occasions Kelly has stated unequivocally
that he had no relations with Ibrahim Mohammed. A friendly
observer saw Kelly pay Mohammed gold pounds prior to Mohammed's
recent trip to Turkey. Furthermore, mysterious receipts have
appeared in Kelly's accounts signed by Ibrahim Mohammed.
It is interesting to note that aroused by our continued
interest in Ibrahim, Kelly has given us a long song and dance
intending to force us to drop the subject about Ibrahim's
being a Greek spy.
e.
On one occasion Kelly told us about having received
money from Major Nikoloupolos of the Aliens Directorate.
This
is (1) an obvious attempt to drive a wedge between our closely
cooperating organizations, and (2) evidence of Kelly's untrust-
worthiness.
f. Kelly has been warned pepeatedly to maintain as good
security as possible regarding the purpose for which he has
rented offices at 13 Patissia Street. Nevertheless, Kelly has
blabbed his business (and ours!) all over Athens, so that he isve
constantly visited by all manner of unnecessary people including
a galaxy of street-walkers.
g. Belly maintains constant relations with several people
who seem unduly interested in our work. We do not att empt
to dictate his friends but we do consider it improper when he
deliberately lies in denying to us that he sees such people.
(Example: A certain Papas, an elderly Greek who seems to be
working with the French Mission here.)
3. In addition to the serious charges which we have against
Kelly as indicated above, there is the additional charge equally
serious but less.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_85.jpeg ---
13-00000
CL
CC
-3-
serious but less specific, that he appears actually to be insane,
to be suffering from delusions of grandeur (meglomania). For
instance, his many references to his future role as prime minister
of Bulgaria, and his illustrative anecdotes regarding the purpose
of the meeting recently held between the members of the Committee
and Mr. Manfield.
4. It is recommended urgently that Kelly be removed immediately
from circulation and that the Aliens Directorate be kind enough to
discuss with us in the next few days or weeks what final solution
we may evolve for the Kelly menace.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_86.jpeg ---
13-00000
T
INFORMATION:
PRECEDENCE
NICUTINE
22 MARCH 51
DATE.
FILE NUMBER
30224
NU PARAPHRASE REQUIRED
ECITED:
ATHE 4821
10:
WASH G INFO PARI G CITE ATHE G
QKSTAIR
TOR.
RELAYED
1. DO YOU KNOW OF DREAMER POLITICAL COMMITTEE CALLED (1) PURPORTED
TO BE FORMED IN ZRMETAL? HAVE NO DETAILS. POSSIBLY GLANTZ
SPLINTER?
N
20 NEW SUBJECT: POSSIBILITY WE WILL SOON. PUT LYLE 0. KELLY ON
ICE. REASON: SMALL SUCCESS HAS GOVE TO HEAD AND IS OUT-GLANTZING
GLANTZ ON FUNDS AND DICTATORIAL APPROACH. THEREBY BEGINNING TO
ALIENATE FOLLOWERS. ALSO POSSIBLE INVOLVEMENT IN SUBJECT OF WASH
33606 (OUT 900.
MATURE. AND ABLE LEADERSHIP OF (2) WHO IS PRESENTLY CON ITTEE
MEMBER. SHOWDOWN NOT YET OCCURRED THEFEFORE. THIS 15 FYI ONLY
IS
UNTIL FURTHER INFO FROM US. IF WE DO REORGANIZE KELLY, AFE
CONSIDERING POSSIBILITY BRINING (3) FFCK HBFAIRY TO ADD HIS
TALENTS TO COMMITTEE. ANY COMMENT FROM HBJOINT ON THIS?
90204 ). OK INSANE WOULD CONTINUE UNDER MORE
3
NEW SUBJECT: FYI (4) OF 19 MARCH PRINTS LONG ARTICLE ON
KMSCHEME. QUOTES SOME TEXTS. WE HAD BELIEVED JAMMED-OUT.
1025Z 22 MAR 51
TOR.

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_9.jpeg ---
1320000
OCTOBER 1950
:
Early in October 1950, DIMITROV visited the Lavrion Camp where he met
with a number of his Bulgarian friends and advised them that he had been
given a 'charter and instructions", by certain members of the American
Embassy, to form a committee of five members for the planning and execu-
tion of a fight for the liberation of Bulgaria. This committee, according
to DIMITROV, would be established in Athens and would cooperate with other
similar committees which have already been formed in France, Germany, and
other countries. The committee would later expand to 20 members and would
establish a so-called "Democratic Agrarian Bloc". Recruits would come from
among the members and sympathizers of the Bulgarian Democratic Party
(Moushynov) and from the Gichev Agrarians. Eligible Bulgarian emigres
would come to Greece from Western Europe to assist in the work, and pro-

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_90.jpeg ---
13-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
EAD
SUBJECT:
SECMET
23 January 1951
Provisional Operational Clearance for
Dimitri A. Dimitrov.
1. It is requested that the attached Provisional
Operational Clearance for Dimitri A. Dimitrov be approved.
Mr. Dimitrov will be used as a contract agent in Greece for
political, psychological, and guerrilla warfare operations
under Project QKSTAIR.
2. In view of the fact that the recruitment of Bulgarian
agents who are scheduled shortly to begin covert training must
be accomplished through Mr. Dimitrov, his clearance is needed
immediately.
in t
Gratian M. Yatsevitch
Chief, EE-I

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_87.jpeg ---
13-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SECRET
Chief, EE 1
13 March 1951
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Dimitri Adamov Dimitrov
nw
Your request for clearance
dated 23 October 1950
Provisional Clearance approved
25 January 1951.
1 In view of the information and recommendation con-
tained in a memorandum from the Chief, Special Security Branch,
Inspection and Security Staff dated 10 March
1951,
an Operational Clearance is hereby issued which will permit the
utilization of Subject's services as a contractual agent in
Greece engaged in political, psychological and guerrilla warfare
operations under project QKSTAIR.
2. This Clearance is for the particular services for which
it was requested. If at a later date it is decided to utilize
Subject in a different capacity, or otherwise change his status,
the matter must be brought to the attention of the Operational
Security Officer without delay.
3. Attached hereto is a copy of the recommendation upon
which this clearance is based.
FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COORDINATION:
for
Willow
W. R. CORNELISON
Acting Operational Security Officer
Attachment
Memo dated 10 March 1951.
CC: OPC Registry
II/CS
II/CS
SECRET
201-45145

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_91.jpeg ---
13-00000
1
5
71
PAGE NO.
DECIPHERED BY:
CHECKED BY
:
271
16-7-8
PRECECENCE.
DATE
FILE NUMBER
NO PARAPHRASE REQUIRED
RELEASED BY
ROUTINE
25 APRIL 51
IN 37092
EDITED BY:
?
224
SPECIAL
FOR AGSDALE.
REP WASH 38739 (OUT 97616) AND FRAN 2910 (IN 36297).
IT WOULD APPEAR SOMEWHAT INCREDIBLE THAT IN ALL WESTERN WORLD
CANNOT FIND A LUMBER CAMP EXDEPOT CAMP OR RANCH, ETC. WHERE
SUCH CHARACTERS AS KELLY CAN BE OUR GUESTS.
HAT KELLY
DEPEAT THA
STILL THINKS WE HIS PATRONS. KNOW THERE ARE NOW NO FACILITIES
STEIN OR CURIO WAS SUGGESTING THAT YOU MAKE FACILITIES AVAILA-
DLE AND FIND STAFF.
ALTHOUGH PERVANENT DISPOSAL EASIEST VANFIELD WILL NOT GIVE
THIS ORDER. AMONG OTHER THINGS IN LAST FEW WEEKS KELLY APPEARS
TO HAVE BECOME SLIGHTLY UNBALANCED AND THERESSAT
A
MIGHT NOT RECEIVE JUST PENALTY COURT
3. MUST ADMIT
IN ACHT
A
IMPRESSION THAT, UN RECE
METAL'S FIRST READY-Og Rizásolo out
BY-OFF
THEREFORE NEPEAT REQUEST IT SUGGESTIE
POS
DONE

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_89.jpeg ---
13-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR: EE I
SUBJECT:
Dimitri A. Dimitrov
SECRE
25 January 1951
1. It has been ascertained from the Chief, Special Security
Branch, Inspection and Security Staff, that as of 19 January 1951,
the files of CIA fail to reflect any reason why Subject should not
be operationally utilized by this office.
2. In view of the above and due to the urgency of obtaining
Subject's services, it is recommended that a Provisional Opera-
tional Clearance be issued for Subject's use as a contractual agent
in Greece for political, psychological, and guerrilla warfare opera-
tions in connection with project QKSTAIR.
'
3. Inasmuch as there is a calculated security risk involved in
using an individual on a provisional operational clearance, you
should use precaution in handling Subject until a full clearance is
granted.
4. This Provisional Operational Clearance is recommended for a
period of ninety days subject to renewal if the full clearance has
not been granted.
W. R. Colon
W. R. CORNELISON:
Acting Operational Security Officer.
APPROVED:
25 January 1951.
SECRET
OPC
Codulich
FRANK G. WISNER
Assistant Director for
Policy Coordination
201-45145
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_88.jpeg ---
13-00000
ADPC
Attentions Security Officer
Chief, Special Security Branch
Dimitri Adamov Dimitrov :
10 March 1951
SEC
:
1. Reference is made to your memorandum dated 25 October 1950 regarding the
Subject and the background information furnished by your office, concerning him.
À check of pertinent Government agencies and the indices of CIA produced ne
information regarding the Subject in addition to that furnished by your office.
2. Conclusion and Recommendation: Due to limitations placed upon this
office's inquiries, we were unable to develop any further information concerning
the Subject since there is no indication in background information or in the
results of a cheak of appropriate Government agencies and the indiess of CIA,
that Subject has ever resided in this country,
However, based on the lack of any derogatory information in the files of
pertinent government agencies, and the indices of CIA, this office does not wish,
at this time, to interpose any objection to the proposed use of the Subject by this
organization, providing Inspection and Security is furnished with the results of
the Field Check when available.
If the situation should be altered and information obtained from which an
investigation in the United States would be productive, this office would gladly
perform the same.
This memorandum pertains only to the assignment mentioned above. Should you
desire to use this individual in a staff capacity or otherwise change his status at
a later date, the matter should be taken up with Inspection and Security. In the
latter event, it is suggested that action be taken, if possible, sufficiently in
advance so that no delay is caused in the transition.
Transmitted herewith are the attachments listed below. If it should be
necessary, for any reason, to return the attachments, it is requested that they
be returned in a sealed envelope marked "Eyes Alone" to the writer.
FOR THE SECURITY OFFICER, CIA
or
ROBERT H. CUNNINGHAM
R
on and Recu
ged,
-
C Attachmenta dsfd cuspt to CIA Salt Officera
dizechame Cheer Data
Additional Copy of Summary
Copy
SECRET..

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_92.jpeg ---
13-00000
PAGE 2 OF 3005
O
MATTER.
IT HELP?
UNDERSTAND THERE 16 A DIAL UNIT I
IS
KELLY PROBLEM IN DRINK INDREASED SINCE KILLY
TIME INFORMANT FOR BGKANTER AND WHILE NOW HOLDT G
DO SO RELUCTANTLY.
4. ALSO CANFIELD FEELS COUPELLOL RESPTOTFULLY 10
.
CEASE REFERENCES TO THE MIRACLES WHICH WILL TAKE PLACE USIN
ARRIVAL OF SENIOR REPRESENTATIVE.
IT HAS ADVERSE EFFECT IN TRALT
OF WHOLE OF STAFF WHO HAVE BEEN BANGING HEADS AGAINST TO FOR
SURE YOU CAN UNDERSTAND PSYCHOLOGY OF THIS.
MONTHS.
TOR:
15BL
Î
02:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_93.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
Agell Towe
;
INCOMING CLASEFIED MESSAGE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
SECRET
PAGE No.
17
Dizonis
FRANKFURT.
To:
ACTIONI
POLICY COORDINATION
CFC (1-2-3-4-5)
IN 30297
INFORMATION
S/C (6-7-8)
Battle SECRET Correspondence por Para. 51 (1) GA AR-350-5
PAR✓
13
:
SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_96.jpeg ---
13-00000
T
PAGE 2
ATHE 5150.
COMPARATIVELY HARMLESS TO CPS.
4. KELLY'S
COMMITTEE
MITTEE WILL CONTINUE.
IN
IN 36130
REQUEST METAL MASTEN
CLEARANCE ON (1) CASE WE WISH HIM FILL IN. REQUEST HBJGIAT ANSWER
ATHE 4821 (IN
) PARA 2.
INFOR
TO:
ANI
DOE
ACT
OF
OUR
EQU
:
NOR
TO N
THIN
TABI
SERI
THREI
.TOR:
TOR: 1625Z 20 APRIL 1951 SECRET

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_94.jpeg ---
13-00000
J.,
J DATE
VOLV SOORDINATION
21 APG 51.
FILE NUMBER
IN
IN 30297
NO PARAPHRASE REQUIRED
EDITED BY:
wath
TO: ATHEG, WASHG
EGRESS
INFO: HEID3, MUNIG
CITE: FRANG.
7.
OKSTAIR
RE ATHE 5150 (1 36:30)
1. HTSTEIN HAS NEITHER STAFF NOR FACILITY HOLD CHARACTER SUCH
AS KELLY AND EXTENDED PERIOD.
20 IN VIEW KELLY'S KNOWLEDGE 22 DREAMER TRAINEES NOW HTSTEIN
AND PAST CONTACTS HTCUPID PERSONNEL, ROCHELL DOUBTS TEMPORARY CONFINE-
MENT ANY PERIOD WOULD ELIMINATE RISK TO QKSTAIR OPERATIONS. MORECVER
KELLY'S ATTEMPTED MANEUVER LAST SENTENCE PARA REF SUGGESTS PERMANENT
DISPOSAL NOT ONLY JUSTIFIED BUT ONLY SOLUTION REALLY SECURE.
AS MANFIELD AWARE, IDENTITY (A) BEING GROOMED FOR ROLE AS
IDENTITY (B). DO NOT HIS RELATIONS KELLY SC CLOSE AS TO OVERVEIG
HIS LOYALTY TO US, PARTICULARLY WHEN DRIEPED CIRCUMSTANCES,
ROCHELL WILL EXPLORE POSSIBILITIES USG IDENTITY (A) Dis
MISSION SOON AS ROVISED WHETHER ZAMETAL WOULD CUTSIDER THEN MEASURES
5° IF ZAMETAL APPROVES, SUGGEST KELLY BE REVOVED FROM SCENE
1 MEDIATELY PICS IDENTITY (Á)'S INFILTRATIO99 CREAN LANG AJ CONST)-
ERING FURTHER DETAILS CETHOD PERMANENT DISPOSAL, PUT FEEL 108
UNDESTRASLE TO OVOLVE HTSTE IN.
1602 21 A
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_95.jpeg ---
13-00000
=
CK, NO.
022
PRECEDENCE
DATE
FILE NUMBER
20 APRIL 1951
36130
ACTION
INFORMATION:
10:
opc
ATHE 5150.
NO PARAPHRASE REQUIRE
RELAY ACTION TAKEN
EDITED B
WASH G FRAN 6 (ROCHELL) INFO: PARI G CITE: ATHE G
TA
EKSTAIR.
1. 09 18 APRIL WE HAD LYLE 0. KELLY PICKED UP BY BGKANTAR
AND PUT USER PROTECTIVE ARREST. HE IS TOLD LIFE IS THREATENED AND
DOES NOT KNOW OF OUR ROLE. REASONS WE FOUND IT NECESSARY: GLANTZAIKE
ACTIVITIES INCLUDING MEGLOMANIA, LACK OF SECURITY, AND MISAPPROPRIATION
OF FUNDS. MOST CERIOUS WAS THAT HE WAS ABOUT TO SELL KNOWLEDGE OF
OUR OPERATION TO THE LOCAL FAIRYS FOR AN INITIAL SUM OF LOCAL
EQUIVALENT OF
SERIOUS
#600
PRICE
WE CONSIDERED INSULTING LOW.
MRREPRESEIBLE THAT OUR
RUN
2. UNFORTUNATELY KELLY IS SO HO
NORMAL: FLAKE DISPOSAL SYSTEM IS NOT SAFE:
TO MAIL LETTERS SO CERTAINLY KELLY MOULDS
GILL REJECTS MANAGE
ANG
3. CAN ZRMETAL OR BGWIDDY TAKE HIM OFF OUR HANDS. REPEAT HE STILL
THINKS WE HIS PROTECTOR SO HE CAN BE PERSUADED TO LEAVE HERE VOLUN-
TABILY. HE MUST HOWEVER BE DENIED MAIL FACILITIES. REQUEST UTMOST
SERIOUS CONSIDERATION AID. WHOLE DREAMER OPS IN SECURITY JEOPARDY.
THREE MONTHS SHOULD BE SUFFICIENT TO PUT HIS GUT OF DATE AND THEREFORE
TOR:
141
:

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_98.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Security Information.
G
for certain actions that were directed against him. KELLY stated that he was
imprisoned a few times and that he suffered terribly during those periods
because of his inability to withstand imprisonment.
=
6. In order that I might have a clear picture of his background and
initial contacts with the Americans in Sofia and later in Athens, as well as
his associations with other intelligence services in Bulgaria and Greece, KELLY
stated that he preferred to start from the beginning of his clandestine work in
Bulgaria and chronologically bring me up to date on his activities and ensuing
events. Since much of KELLY's discussion is repeated in a report he had pre-
viously prepared and which is in his files and since a great deal of the dis-
cussion had no direct bearing on the purpose of the mission, I will for the sake
of brevity and clarity avoid those portions of his story.
.
.
7. According to KELLY, the highlights of his background and activities
are as follows: When the Communist regime gained control in Bulgaria he realized
the position the people of Bulgaria were placed in and that under Communisma
the people were not going to be any better off than they were under the Fascists
or Nazis. The only salvation for the Bulgarian people was for the Democratic
powers to achieve control and thereby extend their form of government to the
Bulgarian people. He therefore proceeded to exploit Bulgaria with a view to
organizing adherents into clandestine groups in order to overthrow the Communist
government that was in control. KELLY stated that he had organized over 250
cells consisting of some 10,000 persons throughout Bulgaria and Macedonia,
=
8. According to KELLY, in 1945 he met the American General Crane in Sofia
and the General requested KELLY to prepare a program of his organization out-
lining its mission, functions, etc.. Upon complying with this request KELLY
stated that General Crane informed him that his program was very favorable and
that he (General Crane) desired KELLY to work for him. KELLY said he agreed
and proceeded personally to exploit the cells of his organization in Bulgaria.
9. In 1946 while KELLY was inspecting units of his organization in Bulgaria
he was arrested by the Communists and tried and found guilty on four counts and
imprisoned. According to KELLY the only reason he was not given the death.
sentence was because the Communists had hoped to use him as a witness against
Nikola Petkov, Agrarian leader in Bulgaria who was also fomenting unrest among
the Agrarian factions. KELLY continued by stating that he remained in prison
for approximately six months near Vratsa where he was tortured by the police in
an effort to extract from him information on his organization and people with
whom he was associated, particularly Americans. KELLY said he did not reveal
the information which the police desired,
10..Early in 1947 through members of his organization he was able to make
his escape from the prison. He made his way to Sofia where he tried to contact
General Crane, but learned that General Crane was no longer in Sofia and that
his replacement was a Mr. Horne (probably John Horner, Change d'Affaire A.I.
of the Political Mission in Sofia). Through the Mission secretary, KELLY made
an appointment to see Mr. Horne and when he did meet him Mr. Horne told him
SECRET
that he was not

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_97.jpeg ---
13-00000
" STANDARD FORM NO. 84
BET
Security Information
Office Memorandum
TO
: Acting Chief, SE
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
DATE: 21 July 1953
FROM: Michael A. Hemovich, SE/2
SUBJECT: Lyle O. KELLY
1. In accordance with your instructions received through Mr. Donald F.
Ewing, CSE/2, and in coordination with Mr. Mahoney of WH Division, I flew to
DTROBALO, arriving there at noon on 26 May 1953, for the purpose of determining
whether Subject has current operational information concerning SE operations
and personnel that would make him a security risk if he were allowed to re-
settle within the next calendar year.
2. Upon arrival at DTROBALO I discussed the case with KELLY's case
officer, Mr. Philip A. Toomey, and the Station Security Officer and learned
that KELLY had been in detention until approximately 15 May when he was released
from confinement and allowed to attend classes and live with other persons who
are being prepared for resettlement.
'
3. Between 1300 and 1600 hours on 26 May, I reviewed the DTROBALO Station
files on KELLY and made an appointment with KELLY's case officer to have a con-
ference with KELLY at 0800 hours 27 May. It was decided to use the office of
the Station Security Officer for the meeting because of its invunerability to
other agents and to the laborers who were working in the area. The Security
Officer stated that the office would be made available for the time specified.
4. At 0800 hours 27 May KELLY's case officer escorted me to the pre
arranged meeting site and introduced me as Mike Vargas to KELLY who had been
waiting in the office. The case officer informed KELLY that I had arrived from
Washington, D. C. to discuss his problems with him and would endeavor to resolve
all matters possible. KELLY appeared elated and in broken English said that he
was very happy to learn that the organization (I presume he meant CIA) finally
acknowledges him as a friend. KELLY stated that he has been waiting 25 months
to speak to someone from Washington. The case officer departed from the room and
left KELLY and me standing in the center of the room. I asked KELLY to be
seated and told him that I speak Serbo-Croatian and inquired if he understood
Serbo-Croatian. KELLY replied that he does speak Serbian and is glad that I
speak the language also because his English was not fluent and he has difficulty
expressing himself. All conversations hereafter were conducted in Serbo-Croatian,
.
5. I opened the conversation by telling KELLY that his reports and letters
were received and studied very carefully at Washington and assured him that
pressing duties made it impossible for anyone to visit him at any time prior to
the present. KELLY replied that he felt relieved that he was not forgotten by
his friends and that he could now reveal everything that has been a puzzle to
him since his apprehension by the Greeks in 1951, and perhaps learn the causes
SECRET
for certain

--- Image 104-10435-10071_page_99.jpeg ---
13-00000
Security Information
-3-
that he was not aware of anything that had existed between KELLY and General
Crane, but for KELLY to telephone him several days later. KELLY stated that he
telephoned Mr. Horne a week later but received no satisfactory response from
him.
11. KELLY realizing that he was wanted in Bulgaria by the police for his
escape from prison proceeded to work his way out of Bulgaria. He was assisted
by one Fancha Fernandova near Plovdiv. On crossing the Bulgarian border into
Greece KELLY stated that he surrendered to a Greek patrol who immediately
channeled him through its interrogation center. During this process KELLY said
he was approached by British Intelligence, a Mr. Andros (possibly Andrews) and
Mr. Scott, and was told that the British had heard of his organization and
wanted him to work for them. KELLY refused the offer and told the British that
he preferred to work with the Americans. KELLY also said that the Greek IS
had asked him to work for them, and that he refused them also. He was then
placed in a refugee camp in Athens with other Bulgarian refugees,
:
12. In 1949 during KELLY's stay in the refugee camp he said that he learned
the art of making trinkets as a trade and was allowed to leave the refugee camp
and seek employment in a shop where he could continue his trade. He found a
shop that offered him a job and he accepted. He stated that he had no intentions
of making a livdihood in that occupation but it did give him an opportunity to
get out of the refugee camp and continue to seek means to combat the Communists
in Bulgaria. While on this job KELLY met a Greek woman by the name of Flora
Vavanou who said she had an aunt who lives in Chicago, Illinois. Since they both
wished to go to the United States, they decided to get married and, with an
affidavit of support from Flora's Aunt, get visas to the U. S.. Their next
move was to get to Italy through IRO channels.
13. KELLY claims that he did not know the Aunt's address or name other
than that she was referred to as Teresa. KELLY said that he and Flora planned
to separate on reaching the United States. According to KELLY, he checked with
the IRO in Athens and learned that because he was a Bulgarian immigrant he was
eligible for emigration through IRO and since Flora had probable means of getting
him to the United States he decided to go through with the plan. He married
Flora in February 1949 and by the latter part of March they were en route to
Italy.
14. While in Italy KELLY stated that Flora communicated with her Aunt in
Chicago who was preparing to process the necessary affidavit for their entry
into the United States. However, during this period KELLY learned that Flora
was pregnant and according to Italian Immigration officials she could not be
considered for emigration from Italy until after the birth of her child. On
learning this, KELLY said his whole plan had collapsed and that he could not go
through with it. He decided to return to Athens and leave his wife with her
parents. They returned to Athens in October 1949. A daughter was born in
November 1949.
ECRET
15. Now that he