

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10213-10002
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
1
L.
3
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT
Related Mission Directive for Mexico
1. Attached in the revised Related Mission Directive for
Kexico.
2. Your approval is requested.
CONCUR:
Uhler,
4. S
Date Played George
1.4. Collin
Chief, Ch
..t
1.
O cater,
ci
24 Jermary 1961
Distribution:
Orig & 2
WHD
10
PG
1 - CA
OI
SR
1-
PI Plans
PI/INT
RI
:
.S COPY
JSK
King
Chiery SH Division
Chier
APPROVED:
lichard Wilm
6/ Deputy Director (Piens)
3 JUN 1⑈
Late Approved
-
1
:
1.

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
:
Guides and Intelligence Directives, but it is expected
that these requirements be satisfied utilizing existing
assets. Of particular interest on & continuing basis
is information on: (a) any indications that Nexico may
be used as a base for clandestine activity directed
against the U. S. (CI Book Messages 23 and 115); (b)
activities of non-bloc intelligence services, especially
those that are potentially harmful to U. 3. interests;
(c) the plotting of revolutionary groups according to
their current importance in attempts to overthrow the
regines of their respective Latin American countries;
(d) the current alignment and activities of political
forces with the potential for assuming centrol of the
Kexican Government; (e) U. S. Communists residing in
Mexico; and (f) the Spanish Communist group.
It will be noted that certain previous contingency
reporting requirements have been, amended as follows:
The former levy for reporting on the stability of the
Mexican Government has been changed to a more realistic
and meaningful statement as reflected by (d) above.
This modification is appropriate, as political changes
in Mexico are most likely to occur within the framework
of constitutionality. The previous charge for reporting
on secret shipments of strategic materials from Moxiec
to bloc countries is no longer specifically required and
has been deleted.
II. OBJECTIVES
1
15.5
PRIORITY A
1. Obtain information on Sino-Soviet blce plans and activi-
ties in Mexico, including those of bloo intelligence
services.
Continue and, where possible, increase physical and
technical surveillance of bloc installations and
residences.
Through controlled agent assets, identify and monitor
the activities of bloc personnel; if conditions
warrant, attempt recruitment or defection of bloc
personnel.
1
"

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
8. Develop and support covert press assets in the
staffs of influential newspapers.
h. Develop Recess to individuals and organizations
in the labor field and support non-Consnist
leaders and groups in key unions.
3. Obtain information on the organizational structure,
key personnal, financing, covert plans and activities
of the Communist Party of Nexico (PCM), Communist front
organizations and groups, espesially the Partido Popular
Socialista (PPS), and non-Communist and/or anti-U. S.
groups that may be susceptible to exploitation by Inter-
national Communion.
Exploit and extend existing penetrations in the
PCA and the PPS.
b. Maintain peastrations of the PCH and seek to
ponstrate the anti-EMCINA wing of the PCM.
d.
Develop and, if conditions warrant, recruit a key
source in the workers' University capable of monitor-
ing cultural contacts between the University and bloc
diplomatic installations.
Continue to monitor the activities of selected
Communist-influenced labor unions and front groups
through the penetration in the PPS) if conditions
warrant, make selected recruitments in the unions
or groups.
4. Continue to obtain information on Cuban Revolutionary
activities in Mexico and support U. S. Government efforts
against the CASTRO regine.
continue to condust penetration operations of Cuban
Embassy and induce defections of Cuban diplomats.
b. Recruit agents in Mexico for operational use in
Cuba.
Secure support of high Mexican Government officials
for the conduct of operations against Cuba.
d. Continue to provide operational support for activities
www.
:

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
:
1
L
:
..
0.
Recruit third nationals and Latin American
diplomats to be assigned or transferred to bloo
countries.
d. Obtain communications intelligence on bloo diplo-
matic traffic.
4. Obtain information ca the Chinese Communists in Mexico.
b.
Spot, assess and recruit or develop sources in the
Chinese community.
Exploit the Gobernacion files on Chinese living in
Mexico and effect penetration of the SMACP.
¡
2
...

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
RELATED HISSION DIRECTIVE POR MEXICO
1. ORIEĦAL PROVISIONS
A.
National Policy. The long-range national policy objOC-
tives of the C.C. Government toward Kexico are to reduce
to an ineffectual level the influence of international
Communism, to encourage democratic government, and to
keep the Mexican government friendly and favorably in-
clined toward U. S. policies. Purther guidance is given
in the current CCB Regional Operations Plan for Latin
America.
B. Operational Emphasis. The Station's primary emphasis
will continue to be placed on clandestine collection
operations and covert action operations against the
Sino-Soviet bloa, Cuban, and Communist elements in Mexico.
:
C. Changes in the HD. This basis policy instruction for
activities in Mexico has been revised in light of the
Station's last Annual Assessment of Progress Report and
to reflect score ascurately operational conditions, capa-
bliities and direction. In view of the importance and
threat presented by Communist Cuba to U. S. interests in
Latin America, coverage of Cuban revolutionary activities
in Mozico has been made a specific requirement under
Priority A. Friority B objectives and tasks include
refinements of desired efforts and also provide for covert
action operations against Cuban targets in Mexico. The
former task for production of motion pitures and their
distribution has been deleted, as it is no longer a vallá
requirement; two former tasks pertaining to the possible
use of foreign diplomats have been combined, a task to
develop young potential political leaders (ŹREAGER) has
been added. Two previous Priority C objectives have been
eliminated, as thore is no established Mexican intelli-
gence service, and the Station regularly reports on
activities of the security services. Coverage of Chinese
Communists has been raised to Priority B coincident with
the elimination of the former Pricrity C section.
D. Contingency Reporting. In addition to the specific
objectives set forth in Section II, the Station will from
time to time be called on to attempt to satisfy Intelligence
1
ļ

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
į
2.
c. Continue CI operations against bico intelligence
personnel.
Seek to reduce and, if possible, eliminate Communist
and leftist control or influence in key governmental
and non-governmental organizations, political parties,
masa media outlets, and other elements that influence
public or official opinion and policies.
a.
b.
C.
Develop political action penetration agents in key
functional groups, such as students, teachers and
organized labor, in order to disrupt and reduce
their capacity for carrying out action harmful to
U. S. objectives and interests.
Expose and discredit illegal or subversive Sino-
Soviet bloc activities and representatives in Mexico,
as well as the activities and personnel of inter-
national and local Communist front organizations.
Identify, discredit, and if possible eliminate
Commmists and pre-Communists from strategic positions
in government, educational institutions, state-
controlled industrial and agricultural enterprises,
laber unions, and student organizations.
d. Provide support and give guidance to individuals and
organizations that can be induced to produce and dis-
seminate anti-Communist, pre-Free World propaganda
via radio, television, newspapers, or other media,
and carry out political action operations against
Communist or other anti-U. S. elements.
Identify, develop, and utilize important non-Communist
political, business or civic leaders to carry out pro-
paganda, economic or political actions against Comm-
unist influence and induce them to support views
coinciding with U. S. Government policy interests.
f. Continue to support and guide anti-Communist youth
and student organizations, publications or agents,
and when necessary, &velop additional assets in key
schools in Mexico City and selected provinces,
!
3
}
'

--- Image 104-10213-10002_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
>
=
:
1
directed against the CASTRO regine in Cuta.
Utilize propaganda media, political action assets,
and other covert means to combat the influence of
Cuban revolutionary ideologies in Mexico,
PRIORITY D
1. Combat ultra-nationalistic and anti-U. S. activities in
Mexico, and propagandize the dangers of Communism.
oi
a. Utilize existing media and political action assets
to combat anti-U. S. propaganda or activities.
0.
0.
Utilize existing media and political action assets to
prevent or negate collaboration between ultra-nationalisti
and Communists.
Utilize modie and political action assets to prevent
or negate the socio-economic and cultural penetration
plans or activities of the Sino-Soviet bloc.
d. Spot and develop for future covert collaboration young
local figures who show potential for political loader-
ship and who may be influenced to beocze generally
favorable to U. S. interests.
Obtain information on the secret intentions and activities
of the Mexican Goverment in foreign affairs, particularly
toward the U. S., the Sino-Soviet bloc, and Cuba.
a.
Continue to develop and influence high level contacts
in the Hexican Ocvernment, particularly the office of
the President and the Foreign Ministry.
3. Collect information on the Sino-Soviet bloo.
a.
Continue penetration of airline and steamship offices
and official government agencies to obtain advance
information on travellers.
Recruit or obtain the willing collaboration of selected
travellers to bloo ocuntries, especially those who will
remain in blos countries for an extended period and
who may be on scientific missions.
5
:
: