

--- Image 104-10111-10079_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10111-10079
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
43872
DAVID CHRIS
14 August 1961
24
Background Use Only.
Do Not Reproduce
13/0
The day after her husbas, 16 e
swww.ties.
Rra
Wisley, Low 06,
at was sent to cata cad
pos
brate
1960, Ars. Christ
as to the
Wed with outline of the
wiet bad very little tige of the factions or activities
md by
and are We are in the atto
rale
Suity and
Qatar of the Last
Comation Entah and that the beach drets wit
organisation forties of comptes and other
Listening burton. told that bebere of the
bee and are required to perfose wir am
taxle, he dist sus entonched to learn that hay
soch, including
on a world see
band's desion
Sere requested to place antolano et ta offices wick
scheduled for cocracy by the Chiedo Aptury. Mrs. Christ
free bold that harshard, the other players of the resulation, a
State Department employee and, as eat we sprebended by the Cuban 6-9
as a Date Deteto, Robert Yest
Tamond by the Cuban Coverseas, a retually the offlear under
State Departamt cover) on the of the age (Words))
e
not motional at the thave, 1. Chris road about is in various sap
st wis
fold
that the operational Info that her lachand ponsecace, if dissed
to the bene, would not coidable dage to the United
States Coverusent, but would alsa Yeed to tonales end probably brutal
Interrogation of berod by the end probably the Resalers es
mile not olvical of other mentions involving her husband.
de about Hr.
cenes stay. eyed by core organimation, Vachets Associates.
Located in New York City and bad besided with also commentation,
Try on a rotal Formity . . Ciriot under
11. wo
stead the res sor Pug this
Subalor thun ti the data of
are the recete or citition of the top
erret, ten disca
m
faily.
technicians, prior to
Editor

--- Image 104-10111-10079_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
C/N
to erunt of danger the
Tatara glared to expe
apartment which was accepted by an witting State Department occratery.
is the initial rising, its gradually plated
addiident informatics, mully for articles, about the oper
then and schong trial. It la bell that Mrs. Christ bus nat
oblatant my startate information about the oprosties other then
Aa tals
net cam too interested in the rational aspect of the case, nor the
1 trial, what little
At
(*
vity appear inreviously discursed with
Res. Cut the ac that the sony (Furcia) retired to holdington, B.d.
ad the bas instructed not to eat any time sheet his release nor his
had embected the gaismes trily fter the sald
ast Hry Kane the king of the saludctos tres Llustily and tas
able to verbally and it to this from their familie.
Rre. Grist gut comes through Fest to be used, prior to
the scrensons of dipimatic ref. was also are of Kessler's
estarities to that of the todsdelars and that be called the
with spending money, vitesine, care, canty and other items as reciented.
De was told that feceler tired tr. Calene, a Casan Kational, to surve
es the technieluas attorney. In May 1961, feelor viitel Kashington, 1.0.
official band is Griet on tea codes in the presence
splore
left
in June 1961 and be born brought to thington, D.G. for emulation
fth Curement persemnal. The has been told that another Cube atterwy
Celexar to
at the tochaledena un banāle
It was not intrated that
Lot
lovers about the healington attorney, Kr. Hughy, but she appears to be
ecymiated sith the
artielss
Conditions
*to leve tat Aadi la bocadit
A by a Odhaa
a cell with
sea edvised that try. Cal as the tediatetere
Dee days prior to Me departmes Ust they were in goad spirite and
What Rs. Geist securially worked in the prison.
fra kage of epifle spations witted by the
ergedention to obtain bar inand's reluce, Fire. Onist now inous of

--- Image 104-10111-10079_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
ese dreet
offered to
algo
mix walls
the offer was never
we bare tried
of the thr20
lub se la insof sy detells of een attapts. Fr. Crist
Not fire of the operation neu in pacurare, which cataplates
perased in Red several occasion when the organisat
schuddered a wives operation, Fr. Gri, y cedgaldance, he
Adess. For ple, the Catro pronas copinging tesstore fer
ra. Chalet camally notional as a to bas action bee ander way to
that
fosiate the tenacias is any change to also had moveren 1440 ps
to 2 this old be carried out. It, the wild only be told that the
14.
Digestiame being leerly Renitored and that there would be co
interference in behalf of hard, was the political climate and
faremble.
As the Over-rican political stamphere, chagua kad specifie
arte occur, such as the hijacking of J. S. airplane, Mrs. Christ gets
sa Licee or approaches regarding the man to sight so to abtate the
release of her husband, of course, dient the to, so are call
considering a sindler possibility.
we have enchered with the technicians and its tiist the dse have bem
mula to visit them. Ines that or 1000 posce use lart by E. Colazer
one
with the Sea and that this as a bag egolated thrush Ba
Se eles keres that we reembly tied the Baie besey in Havana regarding
the receipt of peolages and that the shich to send to the techn
class wire not received by the fa, and therefore, no further red
will to warto
The operatical deindie wich bere tem discussed with magla
be done if they were inadvertently raveled to Kre. Christ. The tala
inte which
dingten etterner bundling
2. Details of present or future perstimes designed to