

--- Image 104-10163-10065_page_1.jpeg ---
104-10163-10065
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
14-00000
SECRET
"Former Contorte savana Station
able personal courage, good security and common sense.
is the ideal type of Latin American agent.
In my mind be
It will be a real loss to
•
the Agency if we lose sight or contact with adolfo. I have met few men
more dedicated and more loyal.
5. [Tiamon
05
271784
Ramon USATEGUI Lezana] AMFAN-3.
AMFAN-3. Recruited by PA-2 and so
close to each other that we referred to them as the old lust Twins.
Ramon was in the shipping business in Havana and eventually had to
leave. He lost his hore, cars, furnishings, etc. His im is now
planning to send him to Nicaragua, and i have recommended him to the
Nicaragua doak eta He has all the qualities ascribed to
desk [r. Grental]
Adolfo SAN FELAYO (see above) except that he has Lever been an American
citizen. He speaks excellent English. He is cedicated, courageous and
most anxious to maintain contact with the Agency. It will be our loss
if this is not done .
251687
6. Bernard L. Barker. AMCLATTER-1. Wife: Clara. Barker is a
Cuban-Azerican. Ex-Captain in the U.S.A.F. See PRQ and 201 for full
bio data. I recruited Barker in 1959, and he served faithfully until
had to exfiltrate him sometime in 1960. He recruited a number of
valuable agents for the Station (including AMCLATTER-5, which see) and
bad an amusing encyclopedic knowledge of Cuban persons, events and con-
tacts in all walks of life. Be was a boxing manager and know intimately.
all Cuban personalities engaged in the sporting industry.
He had a purpy-
dog loyalty to his case officers and to the Agency. His biggest weakness
was his lack of discretion. He was such a loyal Americas (actually if
not technically) that he would fight at the drop of a hat if anyone cast
aspersions on the United States or its leaders. In the atmosphere of
Castro's Cube I might say that that was quite often. e are in the
process of helping him recover his lost American citizenship. When the
Station reopens I would certainly recommend that we continue to maintain
contact with Earker. If nothing sine he would make « vonderful leg-man
for the Chief of Station. His wife is an attractive Cuken gal who is bi-
lingual and an belligerently "imention" as he is.
bks and
by language, could pass either as an American or a ubas - a genuine
asset if he could be taught to submerge his americanimo.
05
7. [Kanolo VEGA Abril. I ret Manolo through Jorns ALONSO POL
(now a prisoner in Cuba as a result of the 17th of April invasion).
Manolo is working for us now in Miami, and I presume we have full bio
data on him. Manolo's family owned, along with Republie Steel, the big
steel plant in Havana which was nationalized by the Cestro regins (Cia.
Antillaan de Acero, 3.A.). Manolo has a brother, benign who would
y
also be worth cultivating. Through his business and fully connections
Manolo knew a great many people of onerational interest. One of bin
friends was David SALVADOR, although Manolo did not ware SALVADOR'●
political thinking (extreme left and anti-i-erican). tanele wo
objective a reporter as I have ever encountered song la!'
A
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
3/00