

--- Image 104-10126-10253_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10126-10253
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Textemony
ASCA
Journal Office of Legislative CounselRETURN TO CIA Page 3
Wednesday 28 June 1978
-
7. (Secret
-
•
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce.
MMP) LIAISON Julie Wetzel, NSA, called to
advise us that a letter was coming over from NSA to Lyle Miller,
Acting Legislative, Counsel, on the subject of the leak of NSA's
She said that the
ability to read [Korean]diplomatic traffic.
letter states that NSA has no objection to the Director's
provision of NSA's damage assessment to the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence. The letter goes on to state
that NSA does not feel that it would be appropriate to reveal
and staff who are aware of NSA's
the names of Congress an diplomatic traffic inasmuch as the
capability to read
Attorney General is investigating the leak.
8. (Confidential - MMP) LIAISON Called Loch Johnson,
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence staff, to advise
him (based on information provided by Suzanne Black, Office of
Public Affairs), that the Agency has no past or present substantive
involvement with WETA. This was in response to a previous
request from Johnson. I also asked Johnson how much information
he wished us to provide him on the Agency's relationship with
public television. He indicated that he is only interested in
a brief sketch of what kinds of relationships the Agency may have
had with public television and I passed this requirement on to
Ms. Black.
9.
41
(Confidential DFM)
DFM) LIAISON Received a call from
Ed Greissing, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence staff,
regarding the House Select Committee on Assassinations request
for access to Church Committee transcripts of testimony by
Agency employees. I asked him to send Ted Shackley's
testimony to me so he could review it before giving approval.
I reminded him that Mr. Sanchez had asked that his testimony
not be shown and that that should be considered the final
Agency response.
10.
-
(Secret DFM) LIAISON Called Earl Eisenhower, Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence staff, who mentioned he would
like the briefing on counterintelligence to be presented to
the Committee during the first week of August. I later picked
We confirmed
up a letter from Eisenhower on this subject.
tomorrow's briefing of four Committee staff members to cover
the Martha Peterson case, specifically the allegations of
poison pills; the discovery of the antenna in the chimney of
Eisenhower
the Moscow Embassy; and the Shevchenko case.
repeated his earlier request to Lyle Miller, Acting Legislative
Counsel, for a trip to NPIC to view Wrangel Island which is part
of the USSR but which some U.S. citizens claim really belongs to
the U.S. Eisenhower had viewed maps of the Island but wants to
see photographs as none of the maps are more recent that ten
I agreed to try to set this meeting up for Friday,
years old.
30 June.
INTERNAL USE ONLY
20437