

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_100.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
=
(2004)
13hm32
i
:
Eε-3.
Execution Prother
ORFE@NO in tur
as many people
i
retifera,
Ⓒ Get break down of
with vani
gees with
employees
nationalities
anton
vanpino
at tart as
Earles
to © US Nots ® Elis & @
Indigenous Sea
⑤lolatba method for
issuing fares in A. Day?
not be sent out ahead-
Will
Ⓒ will need cont
;
of pripity
MGC 123
C
- west order of defacture?
as for curlaus
umber c
Ly, is State Chills of
S
Car
!
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10226-10023
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
= t
DVC DATE
**
F
1.
OS RECORD MATERIAL
THIS DOCUMENT 28 CHARGED TO YOU.
2. RETURN. THIS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES &
DISPOSITION: SECTION, RM ØGE ON OR BEFORE
A
DATI INDICATED.
3 IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
*****179a
LAF
IOUS EDITIONS.
2
3024
CA/HQ.
• 5. Corlat
-
S.
OG/PER
6.
B
-
1
10.
11.
12.
13.
t
-
--
1
RETURN TO
6A-50
15
F/ARD:
R
FORM
1.87
610
AVA_DIA
1114
law
DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.
1
78-112.9
432393
FILE NO CIA AD 37
¡DOCUMENT:
FOLDER:
I.
SECRET ☐ CONFIDENTIAL
1 AFTER 138
SCORDS CENTER
3 X
Z
2
i
PAGE:
BOX:
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
2
E
*
UNCLASSIFIED
:
folder #
:
8
HCF2
December 1 in 192

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_101.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-
41
1
NCZ Paper thun Tow
Reassure Higles.
Get plans of
Cist down men
get abgactive -
7. March 52.
--
Augusting Plans -
-
Fir
r
on
tiel
←
1
my
.N.S.C. paper las been faveed - Directive 12.3
Take of with 22 to 1ove our
Gordinator is under Plans Air.
Ɛε- Wayne Fradendas on T. Schregen
people inluded in their Plans
One
times to nee
hell them on who should hameled - 45, Ele&er+they cotect MI (toma
-
f

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
to serve and assist through such unified political action
the appropriate agencies of our Government and various collaborating
American anti-iommunist organizations in the dissemination of
authentic information on Soviet Russian tyranny and atrocity behind
the iron curtains of Central Surope and Asia, in the promulgation of
necessary stops aimed at the formation of a global network of anti-
Cossunist alliances, notably within the sovint empire, in the foraus
lation of political objectives adapted to the historic requirements
and aspirations of the peoples available as our natural allies, and
in the persistent counteraction of binister Communist and other anti-
democratic influence and groups in our domestic environment.
b. To promote the security and welfare of the United States
by Lasisting upon policies which are shaped in terms of a scrupulous
and forthright observance of the sacred principles embodied in the
aforementioned monuments to the liberal human spirit and wich will
insure lasting peace to all the nations of the world, including those
of Central and Eastern surope, numbering approximately 150,00,000
people.
to arge our lovernment to seek the restoration of severeign
rights and self-government to the nations which have been forcibly
deprived of them and to secure the exercise of the fundamental right
of sulf-dotermination for those nations which have not in the past been
accorded this right, particularly in the countries of Central and
trastorn uropo. .
7
Soviet
6. To impel, on the happy occasion of the liberation of all
pooples from the yoke of ulet aussian imperialism, governmental action
to fulfill the guaranty of free and unfectored elections in these
countries under the supervision of the United Nations and with strict
regard for conditions of population distribution existing prior to the
institution of the kuseification policy bent on the extinction of
the national identities of the respective enslaved countries.
7. Recognising the twofeld naud, vis ridding all countries
involved of implanted Soviet influence, together with ultivate solu-
tion of territorial boundary disputos, it is urged that strict priority
of action be extended to the former consideration.
8. To abot forcefully the realisation of the preceding objectives
and concomitantly contribute to the prevention of a generally
disastrous world war 111 through the vigorous advanconent of psycho-
10.:ical sartaro, with particular emphasis on substantial improvements
in the status and function of the Voice of America, resoundin; procla-
mation of Enrican friendship and support of the liberating evements
olving throughout the wide peripheral uropean and Asiatic area of
non-Russian pooples imperialistically subjugated in the Soviet empire,
and demands for trues representation of these enslaved peoples in the
councils of the "nited Nations.
To secure maximum and unstinting aid on the part of our
Novernment for the manifold operations and the potentially unlimited
expansion of the underground neremunta lehind the iron curtains of
Europe and Asia.
Thouch many of the proclaimed also seem to be identical with

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_102.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
Weeke Eins
t'ia
13ree
N.S.C Jumin Section has
accepted fafer &
10% 52
1095
it's going to onion
Section
where we
trouble is anticipated
Wayne Fredricks with wallet
I
i
Pofer man inte as
of last NSC
of
meation & crill Loke 2 to 4 creche t
getback
on the agenda. (Notomanan)
Reginald angustice $251
knows matchnt This
Jan-He
sai augustine 107am - He will
Refus forted
!

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_104.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Every craiction or be
quent our
or
parations
could be performed further
bock for frontin

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_103.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Well weakes
Mil Eroc. Onda
D NEO
Nevac Order
②Jicament) A(les) O(nden)
Effectin at sto.
ORC has special fasses
special fasses - red whethe
for am
officers - anighandy with them
-
adaptation of the Pass-
the pars itself - wight, do
care
But this is in combattant.
Columns-
Everybody in C20. is excused with this
Motto - Port must be essent people
info_dthey had to be the ven
-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_105.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
149279970 :
S.P.
Phone
28 Nor 51
Evacivation Plans
unemployed
JT H+G. - is in Paris
John
S.P. thinks be would be a good wa
to flan evacuation procedures
as we set green light on
-
as no
:
1
F
:
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_106.jpeg ---
14-00000
?
G
Curriculum vita of:
JOHN S. TAYLOR, JR.
95 rue de la Faisanderie,
Paris XVI. France
Phone number:TROcadero 08-66
43 North Linwood Avenue
Pittsburgh 5, Pennsylvania
Date and Place of Birth: 28 October 1912, Wilkinsburgh, Pennsylvania
USA Passport No:453792
Marital Status: Married (no children)
Carte d'identite No: A 62011
Height: 6'3''
Weight: 210 lbs
Education: Grade School 8 years
High School 4 years
i
Important Civilian and Military Experience:
Employer: US Army
Health: Good
College 4 years
Degree B.A. (Liberal Arts)
The Pennsylvania State College, State College, Fennsylvania
Position: Entered on Active Duty as Seo nd Lieutenant, Infantry-Reserve
Length of Employment: June 1937 - March 1939
Employer: Transcontinental and Western Air, Inc., Kansas City 6, Hissouri
Positions: Traffic and Reservation Sales Representativ
Representative Traffic and Sales .
Manager, City Office
Length of Employment: May 1939 - February 1941
Employer: US Army
sentative)
at Pittsburgh,Pa.
Position: Enetered on Active Duty as First Lieutenant, Infantry-Reserve
Stationed at: New York, N.Y.
Washington, D.C.
Honolulu, T.H.
Noumea, New Caledonia
Norfolk, Virginia
Le Havre, France
Separated from Active Duty as Lt.Col.,Transpor tad on Corps-Reservı
February 1946
-
Length of Employment: February 1941
Employer: Transcontinental and Western Air Inc., Kansas City 6, Missouri
Positions: Assistant to Traffic Manager, Int'l Divid on,New York, N.Y.
Assistant to Traffic Manager for France, Paris, France
Length of Employment: February 1946
Employer: US Army
-
August 1946
Positions Entered on Active Duty as Lt. Col., Transportation Corps, US Army
Stationed at: Paris, France
Antwerp, Belgium
Cardiff, Wales
Bremerhaven, Germany
New York, N.Y.
Washington, D.C.
Resigned from Active Service with same rank
Other Information:
'
Speak French mal erately well.
Have lived in France a total of three (3) years and am now a
resident.
Practically all of my experience in civilian and military life
has been office management and direction in outside activities.
References:
Mr.Alexandre de Bondini
Vice-President, Int'l
Automatic Electric Corp.
of Chicago,2 rue Chartran
Neuilly-sur-Seine
Telephone: MAI 76-22
Wr.Philippe Hottinguer
Hottinguer et Cie.,
Banque, 38 rue de Provence
Paris, IX.
ence
Telephone? TRI 28-84
Monsieur Jean Monnet
Commissaire General
au Plan de Modernisa-
tion et d'Equipement
18 rue de Martignac,
PARIS VI
Telephone: IV 75-70

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_108.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SECRE
SECURITY INFORMATION
18 January 1952
I
Present were Messrs. Jackson and Washburn of MCFE, Messrs. Barrett,
Joyce, Devine, Sargeant and Kohler from State, and Messrs. Dulles,
Wisner, Lloyd and Braden from CIA. The meeting was held in
Mr. Barrett's office on 17 January at 4:30 pm.
CONCLUSION: That the Crusade for Freedom organization should continus.
The following is a transcript of Mr. Bradan's notes of the
meeting.
C. D. led off, admitting the frustrations that a long empaign
on the Crusade for Freedoms caused to the State Department and
gested the following programı
1. A l-day bell-ringing campaign in all cities.
2.
Direct mail to corporations.
At this point, Mr. Machburn interjected to say that he would need
about two weeks of "low drums" promotion before the i-day empaign.
Jackson went on to say that under such a scheme there would be no
time on the part of the chairman for a build-up of invidious cœmari -
sons in the press. At Jackson's request, Mr. Washburn passed around
a Crusade publication entitled "The Voice of Amarica - 1951 - A Year
of Progrens". This brochuro, which in four pages praises highly the
work of the Voice of Amories, is to be mailed by the Crusade to ita
chief contributors.
Hr. Barrett then made the following points:
1.
The National Cumittee for a Free Europe grew out of the
idea of helping refugees and of giving them a voice. It has changed
over the years to a huge operation with many new ideas, and the
Crusade for Freedom camo along as a cover necessity.
2. He asked unother the demands of fund-raising had not begun
to make less effective the primary job of helping refugees, whether
SEC...
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_107.jpeg ---
14-00000
17
7.
:
k
:
Mr. Brodeus:
;
25 Jun 52
In callating these 2 reports, I find
some slight differences. The only one
which seems significant is marked in.
redt below; but, I've listed some others
for your fossible convenience. Does print 4
resine a mems or is it carelessly written
or is the meshed of collaborative Braden
Devine
understood?
1. page 1, line 2
"but in a considerably
tower kay'
"
hejinning
2. page 3, para
mr. Dulles...
" in close coordination
with UOA
1. not included as
an
agreed item
itery
committed, instead.
2. page 3, last para
page 5, para beginning
"Duller..
"to include The
Committee of the Urice"
3.
page
3; the
points
:
Point 2:" and not
last more Than
page 5
2.
duration
"If short
2 weeks"
an
Point 3:"
explanation of USA-
R&E relationships
Pts 30 it
7+ 3: " including
the world of the Voice
* Point 4: 9.V. Diffiot Pt 5 q. V
9.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_109.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
2
444
+
the tail - Crusade for Freedom is not waging the dog. He
remarked that in a conversation with Alan Valentine he had found
that Valentine is inclined to agree with him.
3. Against Mr. Washburn and the Crusade for Freedom, he had
only one complaint. They were too good, too big-time. They made
such an effective appeal 'tant the recipients could not avoid running
down the competitor. He stated as his opinion that the Crusado was
jeopardizing a multi-million dollar operation -- the Voice of Americs -
and might even be jeopardizing another multi-million dollar operation
Radio Free Europe -- for the sake of raising throo million dollars.
4. He thought balloons and some other operations done by the
Committee were best done by private means.
5. Ho leaned toward going back to the beginning and looking
at the Crusade as puroly a cover oporation and not an attempt to
raise large funds and making a lot of hoopla. He suggested that the
Crusado should raise only enough money and make only enough of a
ampaign to provide a dignified cover. He suggested mail colicita-
tion, magazine advertisements, the publicizing of two or three large
anonymous gifts, all without high-pressure. Then he said, "Let's
get on with the main job of radio and refugees."
Mr. Dulles asked whether this danger to the Voice was so great.
"Didn't you get more money this year?" Barrett's answer was "No"
and he pointed out that there was no damage done to the Voice by the
Crusade this year insofar as funds were concerned but he feared the
future. Dullos asked whether we couldn't work out the timing of the
Crusade so that there would be no interference on the hill. Mr. Barrett
did not directly answer the question. He said the cover was bad. Too
many people already know the truth about the Crusade and he is worried
about it. He said it surprised hin that it worried nim more than 18
worried Mr. Dulles. A large campaign raises the question, he said.
of how all the work is done on such a small amount of money. He
thought the Crusade called attention to itself as cover.
Howland Sargeant asked Jackson to answer this question, "f
Miat various uses are the Crusade?” Jackson listed them as follows:
1. Cover. He agreed with Mr. Barrett that the Crusade both
increased and decreased the security danger.
2. It brings in nonsy.
3. It educates and intereste taricans in the whole problem
of psychological warfare and propaganda and does so more than any
thing else that is managed by the Goverment or by private funds.
He thought this was greatly important and said that although he
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_110.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1"
1
1
SECRET
3.
1
realised that mistakes had boon made and the Crunado had critici sed
the Voice, strategically the Crusade muld be of mormous help to
the Voice by publicdging the need for communicating to people in
alavery.
Sargeant thought point 3 was the most important. He asked whether
the Crusado couldn't be tied in with this point. Jackson said, "Yes,
end we are starting ith this issue of the Crusader publicizing the
Vico.# Washburn added that 25 million contritators, counting this.
year's and last year's contributions, may prevent cutting down the
operation as Earrett suggests. They will raise a lot of questions.
Farrett disagreed and repeated his suggestion of a one-month operation
confined to magazine advertising and dirvot mail. Jackson asked about
the magazine advertising. He said you had to write copy for magazine
advertising and the copy would have to advertise Radio Free Europe.
Barrett ancored, "You can control the copy on magazine ads. There
is a lot of time allowed for going over them carefully before they got
into print."
Wachturn repeated several times that it would be a great shame to
let the Crusada go. Jackson said the Crusade gave a real lift to
exiles nɔt only hero but abroad.
Kohler said he had been thinking about the problem and had two
suggestions to make:
1. Could we exhort people to give a collar tɔ Radio Free Europe
and at the same time to write a letter to their Congressmen backing up
the Voice of America?
8. Could the Radio Advisory Chmittes of the Voice of America
team up with the Crusade to help with general publicity?
Jackson answered the first question "No". He thought that would be
dangerous. To the second question, he said "Yag". He again outlined
his idea for a campaign calling for education on a general psychologi-
cal warfare progræs with a final request to contribute to the Crusade.
Mr. Dullos again asked Mr. Barrett about his financial problems
and the timing of his request to the hill. Barrett said he would have
the most difficulty from January to July. hashburn said, "Then we'll
run a empaign in September only and there'll be no horn-bloading until
then.
Dulles said that he thought that if the Crusade could be limited
to September he doubted that it would interfore adta Mr. Barrett's
fund-raising problems. That, coupled ad in a better degree of coordina-
tion, idth the use of Kr. Ioaler's private advisors, and wit) a great
effort on the part of the Crusade toward prychological warfare education
would give the Valcs much invisible support. Sargeant said he agreed
SECRET
T

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_112.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-5-
Barrett took this up at ance and mentioned letter writing. Turning
to washburn he said, "Abboti, put your mind to work." ¡in thought va
should be able to find somsáng. He muggested we ask Washburn to
look into other projects lise the letter-writing campaign that vas
done for Italy. No mentioned the Common Council for American Unity
and Mr. Dulles suggested the Friendship League run by Christian Herter.
Dullos asked for agrement of the group to do the campaign on a
modest baɛis for the month of leptember only, to keep the orgerdzation
together, to include the Committee of the Voice, to assure full osor
dination of all publicity to work hard on the specific ideas
mentioned by Sargeant. Devins asked if man a campaign woull not
mean playing Radio Free Eurype down tɔ, say, fourth placs? Jackson
said, "No, it would not moms teat; Radio Free Europe would singly be
one of the themes that was played, sometimes at the top of the ladder
and sometimes down the ladder, it would depend.“
Barrett again raised the cover problem and his dissatisfaction
with the Crusade as cover. Dulles explained that this was a problem
that had to be lived with.
Jackson onco more attempted to get agreement of the group on
the following pointer
1. The Crusade to catione.
2. To begin not earlier than September and to be of very short
Curation.
3. The whole organization to devote itself to education in
psychological warfare, including ine work of the Voice.
To study means of drie action on local and national lovale.
5. That everybody agree to tale progres and work out the details
as mon as possible.
Barrett asked first Joyce and then levine whether they agreed to this
program. Both did agras.
-
but
Barrett said that he could not commit nincelf to wis progres.
He said he was leaving sortir and felt that he could not commit the
Department of State under thess circunstancos. He said he would
agree on one point only - that the Crusade abould not disband
he reiterated his conviction that it ought to be of a muen lower
pressure than the discussion so far outlined secued, and he again
mentioned magazines and direet ag. Jackson said that it was all
very wall to tell the group that they more not to disband but he
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
no
Par
those of ours there are also at the momsat several serious obstacles
for our alone comparation and the federation.
two bodies pist forent national gro.ps.
:
PERSOA
to.
oke of the
nationalities present in have not their counterparts in the
ederation as is the case of sache,
.zsche, atoniano,
atoniane, houmaniaca and Serbs.
The efforts are rado to bring these national groups within the scheme
of the Wederation. On the other side "krainians, Carpatho-kathenians,
Syelorussians, and Slovak autonomists are not represented in our
Committee, It should be stressed also that some of the corresponding
now omigration roupe, of the last mentioned nationalition are boing
considered by our friends from a cooperative due to their
soparatistio tendancies. I realise that the thorny roblem of the
independence of the some of the mentioned nationalities on ld hardly
be at the present moment introduced in C. I would be inclined to
suggest that as many of our immediate, sins are similar to those of
the Federation, regardless of some substantial differences we should
take advantage of such a large body of organised American friends
oagerly interested in the liferation of our respective countries
within the whole area of Central-Eastern rope. The same would apply
of course to all component national organizations of the Federation
such as for instance Polish American Sogress which is not yet closely
linked with the Federation. I could suggest that as all our groups
have already established their liaison officers to appoint a liaison
to The odoration of Americans of Central and last suropean Descent
in order to be informed about their activities and to represent there
our point of view. Such a cooperation may be of a great importance
in many fields. 1 am sure that all these American or anisations would
to willing to help us in rising before the free world the problems
o Deportations and forced labour in our part of the world, as our
rolish American Congress was very helpful in bringing the Katyn
Forest massacro into the light of the fros opinion. Lotus 450 028
American brothers not only in such other is vital nervices as
sonding millions of food and clothing parcele behind the Iron Curtain
or signing tens of thousands of affidavits and jeb assurances for
Displaced Persons. Let us ecoperate with to close as possible
in the most important political problems of cur strugle for freedom.
0:
:t
The principal political is6.0 facing as in that respect is
that of pressing for a "Liberation folicy" of the United
other Feetorn Towers,
tates ard
ith the approach of “ovomter 1952 plectionS
it is becoming obvious to all of that it will be of extreme impor-
tanco for the cause of Cup Prea sho will colected as the non
legislators of the United states. As lie28 We are
interfere into Amirican domestic polities, as representatives of our
ot allowed to
countries we are deeply interested in whose hands the
future of the world events is going to the 12 the years to come.
Pate and the
is now a commonplace to state that horiet assle and the nitod
will decide the fundazontal, universal issues in which cur countries
are so much concerned--!iberty or lovery.
this should be a sulter O
Le Collovo deeply that.
cotto: interest to co and
of the nited
to the citizens
talno. ": will be org th
than just a shortsightedness
not to ronitzo hat in t : 3 decisive struggle for the very existence
of our nations wo
wo are lucky to possan here cowerful and understantin,
Allies in at least 1 million A-cflcar voters at entral-"actern
uropean coscont.
Nie are
are equally anger as ourselves in bringia;
tatoo
1
1
'

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_114.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
!
SECRET
TOMO
17 January 1962
]
Doar Mr. Minotts
Enclosed please find six copies of
pamphlet entitled "inconquered". As you
requested, they are being forwarded to you
for delivery to Teslove.
Sincerely,
Frank C. Kilday
JAN 17
SECRET
I
"
¢
÷

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_111.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
. 4
>>>>
with Mr. Dullos' view of the Crusade giving inviable support and
wondered whether we could not make the inviable aspects visible.
He thought that to hold the whole Crusade organisation together for
a year merely to conduct a two-week campaign would waste many good
men's time, Barrott agreed that a two-week smpaign wouldn't keep
the organisation alive.
Sargeant asked if there wore mot other ideas which could be fad
through the Crusade machinery, thus making more constructive nao of
it.
Farrett raised the question of internationalizing the Crusade
effort. Jackson replied that there was an abortive French project
which he thought would shortly fall flat on its face. The British,
he thought, would shortly make a final decision as to whether to go
ahead with an exile program or nɔt. He seemed dubious that they
would decide to do so. He mentioned Joan Faul David and raix et
Liberte as the only foreign operation in this field which had any
spark to it. Barrott agreed but asked whether or not some Furopeana
couldn't be put on the Board of Directors. Dulles replied that this
was very difficult, that they couldn't attend meetings for one thing.
Parrott said, "Couldn't there be an annual meeting simply as a front,
as camouflage?"
Jackson said that NCFE did get involved in European organisatione,
that they had close affiliations with the Furopean kovaient, with the
Free Trade Union Comittoo in Edle, adth the International Journalists.
adta Strasbourg University, and all the radio programs were reaching
the point where they were thought of as programs belonging to the people
tɔ whom they were broadcast, NCFE had, no thought, internationalised
a great deal and in a very natural way. A board of foreign directors
would spoil that natural process by setting up an obvious phoney.
Washburn again raised the argument of timing the campaign to tako
place only in September. There was no direct response to this sugges-
klon.
Sargeant, referring again to the use of the invisible assets
mentioned by Dulles, unought that if the Crusade continued it should
be planned not primarily to raise funds except as œover. Attention
should be focused on:
ESA.
1. Ine development of understanding; the battle for the minds of
2. Two or three concrete tings which private citizens could da
in this battle.
SUPPET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_113.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECOLT
said to first question the group would then ask is "What shall vo
do?s 26 said that question had to be angwered. Barrett amid, is
seld
have a coordinating cosmittee of Braden and Devine tɔ work tids
problem out."
Thero followed some discussion of the balloon project which is
the subject of a separate Konorandus for the Record by Mr. Gates Lloyd,
PY-CLOT&B: ch
THOMAS W. PRADES
(hiof, International Orgmisations Brench
Orig
-
DOCI (thru ADPC and DD/P) ·
1 cc - PI
1 ec -
& ce
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_116.jpeg ---
14-00000
OFFICERS
29
C
National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc.
330 FIFTH AVENUE . ROOM SOL . NEW YORK 1,
TELEPHONE BRYANT 9-2100
Joy C
Dear Pocke
FIX****S OF THE BOARD
Joka C Hugues
C. & Gresha
SARGUIDE COMMITTE
Preters & Defense
STED HIS
Prad
***PRESENT AND TÉLAGUERS
Trendnes C Augustine –
MASANT TREASURE
MEMBERS
Claas L. Rework
Reprend Vue Alexander
Laud bel
A A. Belk
France
Roberts Exte
Roben Bradfed
Harry & bubu
James & Carry
Harrys Chase
Loca D. Cag
Willas L Cafon
Clark M Gául
Card B Cable
Frank R. Leesaya
William } Donovan
Hugh P
Alles Dutes
Dwight Eaczbower
Mark F brings
James & Fac
Virgina C Girone
Williams Geers
Charles R Hork
Palmer How
Arthur His Lane
October, 1951
The National Committee for a Free Europe is hap-
py to send you a copy of its illustrated booklet,
UNCONQUERED, the story of the outstanding Czecho
slovakian patriot, Milada Horakova.
Milada Horakova was unbelievably courageous dur-
ing her imprisonment under both the Nazi and
Russian-dominated Communist dictatorships in
Czechoslovakia. She was a true defender of de-
mocracy, and sacrificed her life for those prin-
ciples of liberty which all free men everywhere
hold dear.
I cannot urge you strongly enough to read
UNCONQUERED and learn the story of this brave
woman who dared to oppose the Bolshevist con-
spiracy to destroy democracy in Czechoslovakia.
I ask you to join us in working to preserve
peace with freedom for all mankind. If you wish
further information about the National Committee,
please write me.
Sincerely yours,
Go Jaebrow
C. D. Jackson
President
Henry LexE
Joseph V
Web Madding
Fredens GAES
Arthur Wa
Robert P Fo
Reuben B Ra
John A. Shiley
Spyros Sus
Charles P Tats
Dewa W
Abbon Wzbżen
W. V
VERİ
Walter H. Wussies, je
Matte Wa
Mrs. Query Wright
Darryl Zack
Additional copies of UNCONQUERED, while available,
are 15¢ per single copy; bulk shipments of 100 cop-
ies or more are 12¢ a copy.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_115.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
|
i
UNCONGDER
Cayonight: 1951 M
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR VERY EUROPF, Isc
Social worker, lawyer, humanitarian,
enemy of dictatorship, devoted to social justice
and equal rights-Milada Horakova fought
… and died.….. for a better way of life for all.
Her tesistance to the Nazis and the
Communists has already become part of
the history of the Czechoslovakian
fight for freedom
This is the story of her hight.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
f-
When
!
freedom back to our part of the world. in good American citizens,
Lax-payors, suldiors at workers they are fully untitled to sustain
us in our efforts to the86to our countries.
Itborate
arardions of party
affiliations we should asport our faithful friends to aloh
and
our enemies. Suey a pottey was ap 11ed utall uten
American
Latour Uniens in the case of the Tart Hartley Fet, when all candidates
for the meat in the inuse of representatives or Benste and state
Governorships, regardless of their party compotency, have been asked
for their stand in that estter and their record of voting was chooked
from that point of view, Such is the baslo technique of the pramaure
policy in this country. Applied to oreign Affairs it won't be either
a now thing in the United Staten. It is a well known fact that the
organized Jown of New York and other big American cities have mostly
contributed to the miraculous re-emergence of the free state of Israel.
Irish-in ricans sustain vigorously the national claim for a United
Ireland. The three "hyphenate" "roups of Amarican-armane, Irish
and Italians are mainly responsible for the eventful abolition of
+12sonian Ng of Entions policy, but, in our case, do not weat
to destros anything] our six is constructive. o need our Azorican
friends and relatives to operate with us for a positive purpose of
Liboration. This may be in the United States the most powerful way
of changing the entestruye trend of American policy in respect of
astorn -uropean problems. I see no reason why millions of Americans
of Contral story uropean Descent should not demand openly from
their future legislators what stand have they taken in regard of
liberation of our countries; (Are you for, are you against, or are
you just neutral")--what nave, they done to materialise such a libera-
tion in their past activities, what and in which way do they intend
to do in future: Such a questionnaire may in very useful in reviving
our issua before American political circles and the wide „ublia
opinion. To some of us it Bay seem too bold an initiative. However
11 we really are of the opinion that without the speedy liberation of
Central-astern urope-1:19 agnificent country of the "nited tates
carmot survive wither as a happy and frue land then by the raising
are in this rospect not only filfilling
of the Liberation cause
•
our duties towards our respective countriesbut Also A Northy service
for the free people of America.
I
2
W
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_117.jpeg ---
14-00000
*** wyn
-
T
: .
•
F.
matthem in Prague had a festive air. Jammed with spectators - rare in Communist
at semed more like a celebration than a monster trial of 13 of Czecho-
cocinas freedom, loving patriots Chief defendant in this mock trial was Milada Horakova.
Pecan the liquidation of Czech democratic leaders"by the Communist regime.
1
1
*
:
The Mercer, HOWARD COMPANY
WALDEN
Though graduated with a Law
degree. Milada Horakova's love
for people brought her to head
the Children's Bureau of the
Public Welfare Department in
Prague. Here she established a
system of foster homes and
proper adoption procedure. Her
legal training assisted her in
solving juvenile delinquency
and the establishment and
administration of homes and
hospitals for orphans and men-
tally retarded children.
•
Doctor of Law, former worker
for the municipal administra-
tion of Prague. Member of
Parliament .. the 48-year
old Czech patriot stood firm
against the verbal lashings of
the Red prosecutor. "Milada
Horakova you are a traitor
to the Peoples' Democracy of
Czechoslovakia, What is your
defense?"
Defense? Milada smiles. There
is so much to say. But where to
begin? Almost 25 years ago...
+
During the next 15
years.
Milada worked tirelessly in the
preparation of important fegis.
lation for the Czechoslovak
Parliament. She worked on the
laws regulating the work day to 8
hours, suppressing prostitution,
protecting home workers,
restricting child labor... and
much other social legislation.
M. Horine
Her fight for freedom and social
justice found expression through
the National Council of Women,
Happily at work in what welfare
and the Council, she devoted her
energies towards helping others

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_118.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
I
1
Executive Secretary of the
Czechoslovak National Council
of Women, she was a member of
the International Women's
Organization, too. She travelled!
to many countries representing
the Czechoslovakian women.
And thus she foresaw the threat
of the Hitler dictatorship's
greed and power
She organized an underground that
baffled the Germans. Instead of large
meetings, she set up a chain of small
groups. Only the head of each group
knew the other members These group
heads would meet in different homes or
in a doctor's office. Thus, when the
Gestapo arrested a woman underground
worker, they would be unable to make
a mass arrest.
d for countries that Hiter could not be
" of
+
Will Heler talked pore.
17. wit michumer. died across the border into
Son Mard Path 1939. When the Germans
t
are stars anal raped the leading democracy of
Paropa. Manhe pledged to help destroy the German
+ head
A
15
of organized the Women's
:
'
4
"
:
ney Movement. Popular with
social welfare groups.
1. Hakova was known and
She was able to recrut
drground army of former
tea, social, workers to fight the
At the same time. Milada
helped to write a new consti-
'tution to be used when the
Nazis were destroyed. She was
in constant contact, via secret
radio, with the Czechoslovak
government-in exile in Lon-
don. Thus she transmitted
the progress of her work on
the post-war constitution.
"
Milada and her resistanon
constantly embarrassed
mans. They arranged hiding
and led the particams, helpeds
Jews to exi the clutches
Gestaper, set up in sot-lieger s
spy network and distrala
pamphlets te stect the 1"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_119.jpeg ---
144
ith Fitt
W
14-00000
,
The Nans had long wanted to
test Milda Having learned
win the new AU
•
berated Crechoslova
La the hoped to catch her
th this tidence One after.
2417
Pter Gestapo agents
Must be assunta home and
attested her and her husband
Milada and her husband were
separated, and she was taken to
the Gestapo's investigations cen-
ter. Petchek Palace. Here, even
brave men broke under the ruth-
less questioning. But, though
she was questioned often, she
was not frightened. Her answers
1
- all lies seemed so logical to
the Gestapo, that she did not be.
tray even one of her co-workers
in the resistance.
Fur Milala had hidden the notes for the proposed constitution in
A
x of her daughter sounds. While kissing the child goodbye, the
ment to the youngster, who later burned the Lotes.
For 15 months the Gestapo questioned her, slapped her from one prison to another
Never once did she give them the slightest shred of evidence. Not until 1911, when
Hitler's armies defeated France and arrested some of her escaped to workers, did they
associate the escape with Milada.
Though forced to wat
munition factory und
ground, labor in m
mosquito-infested 1
and clean house for the
tapo ……. Milada never
plained. Her ready
was a constant antio
to the Nazis. Her optu
and hope was a WHITI
encouragement for hei
Now priviners.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_121.jpeg ---
14-00000
1 time in freedom and
enquales for all. Des that
"
1
whsjet tubs thach the
hand wanting the trual
Mlada Hoskova mom has
up by the C-mamu
..
4 (
Returning home after 5 horrible
years of prisons and concentra.
tion camps and torture cham-
bers... Milada was joyously
reunited with her invalided hus
band and grown daughter. Both
had miraculously lived through
the German tyranny.
Apprehensive of Czechoslovakia's new-
won freedom and to guard against
another imperialistic power's conquest
of her country, Milada successfully ratt
for Parliament. After organizing a fund
for political prisoners, she introduced
a bill providing pensions for the fam-
alies of Naz Victimis,
The Communist prosecutor
is in a rage. He knows that
Milada has bested him. Furi-
ouds he screams, “You are
a traitor to the Peoples' Dem-
ocracy of Czechoslovakia.”
"I will prove that Milada
Horakova was paid by the
capitalists; a spy for the
Western powers; a war-
monger: bembardment of
Prague was her aim; she
wanted death for women
and children: she wanted the
Germans to rule Czechoslo-
vakia. There were many
other ridiculous charges.
The trial continues.
Running for reelection, Milada
campaigned on a platform of
freedom of press, freedom of the
right to work, freedom of assem-
bly, and all other individual
freedoms. She warned the
people of the treachery of Stalin-
ists... who are motivated only
by the interests of Russian
imperialism.
Kawin
She told her friends that a tirw
taved Czechoslovakia.
munist was infiltratung into t
crument and though this made
tive promises to workers and i
intended to 'take ovet
tualis destroy the rights of free

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_120.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
$
•
proom di Terezín, she spent 16 months in volitary confinement, another be mont.
Never permitted to get fresh air, scarred by her cloutis, guzwed by
☐
"
"
red soup and water
121
Many
Milada, nevertliciess, refused to knuckle uncer
The many months in solitary
confinement shattered Milada's
health But, when finally
released to the prison proper.
without regard for her own
safety she bathed and cared for
sick, elderly prisoners. Her un
conquerable spirit was a shining
example for other less stalwart
prisoners to carry on
Finally, brought
#141
the st and trul le bur
Mah court, she ta...
death penalts. But he
clempisent, appeal
}
Germens' to or of
her a martyr "
"
'
"
i
.41
After a year in the German concentration camp, she was itcol by the victorious. American
When leaving to return to Czechoslovakia. Milada pledged herself to continue the stringale
human rights and social welfare, and to help those who suffered under the Nazis
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_122.jpeg ---
14-00000
L
mamatists Tualized
In the people had for
•
Il cakowa
And
pouched her ask
10 pun them
ang satal wellate
Paton Meang through
truckery she refused,
Those in Parliament who
had fought for human
rights and social welfare
were appalled by the new
regime's tactics. They asked
Milada for advice. She re-
plied. "I have resigned. I
shall not give in I have
chosen a straight path, and
this I shall follow."
.:
•
autrated ant s the cabinet, and after gaming control of important labor unions as well
the pdice and Air y, the Communists staged a coup´ In February of 1948, with the threat of
acario Soviet Army, they successfully overthrew the democratic government in Czecho-
Shakis. For the wcond time in less than a decade, the Czechoslovaks lost their freedom.
10 suppress opposition and
strengthen their grip on the
people, the Communists
resorted to nighttime attests,
nathout warrants of legal
Change. Their campaign of tet-
fost struck botor in the hearts
of all.
11.
Returning to a subordin
job in the Social Se
Prague, Mdada
less continued to tight
At every
portamity, she talkeal
people compated the "1
ples' Democracy with
Germans, found new dat
Chet 11 thear drive
with power. Both form
dictatorship, descarta
hide behind slogans.
and prepare
When she refused to compromise, the Comumusts marked her as then 21 enemy
friends warned her to flee the country, Milada refused to leave. Her telephone conversations
were listened to. Her servant was actually a spy. She was threatened and arrested
Though

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_124.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
•
THAT
THIS
I
WORLD
FREEDOM
UNDER
GOL
111
IN
SHALL
HAVE
}
7
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR A FREE EUROPE, INC., is a
group
of private citizens who have drawn together to carry out concrete
and direct action to restore and strengthen man's most valued possession—
freedom.
The Committee has as its active allies numerous exiled democratic
leaders who have found haven in the United States from the Communist
tyranny of Eastern Europe. Radio Free Europe, of the National Committee
for a Free Europe, is setting up facilities that will enable these trusted
patriots to be heard again by their own people. Not only does Eastern
Europe hear the exiles" impressions of the United States, but American
messages of hope and encouragement are transmitted, and, above all, the
truth which totalitarian governments forbid their enslaved peoples to hear.
Freedom or the enslavement of men's minds and souls, is the vital issue.
What shall we pass on to our children-their rightful heritage of freedom,
or the spiritual devastation of Communism? At this very moment the kind,
of world they will inherit hangs in the balance. The issue is for you to
decide. In the vital conflict for the preservation of freedom, the National
Committee for a Free Europe offers every single citizen the opportunity to
throw in his weight.
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR A FREE EUROPE, INC.
301 Empire State Building
350 Fifth Avenue
New York 1, N. Y.
i
(

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_126.jpeg ---
t
14-00000
P3
inclusion of Dr. Cousity, or any other person, sa mno of the 12 representatives
an
of the liational Council, who, together with the 12 representatives of the
Mtionl canlita an to any on the discusions leading to the formtion of
a poranent bo to represent, Trochoslovak exiles.
Purther, W. Senid stated that when a final program had been agreed
to, in his opinion, the only lar to holding any office in a unified ayunina-
tion would be the usdillingness of any individual to a copt the overall
program to which the agreement had been accorded through democratic procedure,
Apparintly, he also advised that he considered this policy to apply to himself
as well as to any othere. Agreement was accorded on this point by the repro-
sentatives of the Council of Free (sechoslovakia.
Hise Augustine also presented the rules which have been adopted for
the discharge of the administration of Chechoslovakian affairs in exile. She
called the attention of the meeting particularly to Item #3 and #5 of these
rulca derein it is stated that:
3) The Council and the National Coni tee of Free Caeci:oslovakia make
available to the provisián) edministrators the requisite finncial resourors.
5) The norisimal adiznistrators deposit the funds made available
to them in a joint scement which they handla joiurbly and prior to the cousation
of the provisional administiction, they shall jointly account for the use of
sald funds.
After Un meting lica Augustine made available the following two
Usts of 12 persons, from cach grup, in accordance with the fimal agreement
for the provisional administrations
Japanok
Zenkl
Ripla
Kocvara
Blaho
Diaska
Taboraky
Tusck (mile class)
Mair Malical democrat)
Feierabend
Kinok
Pist
Silva
Corte
Franek
Peroutka
Clavik
Buitrich
Lastrich
12 for
HAXEX
nously
Procinaha
44444

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_125.jpeg ---
14-00000
f
į
!
#10
Janvary 2, 1950 & W
%
KARU
To: . R. Dollaro
Hr. J. F. Leich
Pront R. J. Ikare
3135.071 Report of meting at State Digartemet, forkenhy, January 23, 1952.
PRESINT: Man hry Augustine representing Hr. J. F. Leich in his aboence.
Mr. Irold C. Vodeler
Mr. Gatos Llad
12. Jiten aurpell
Mr. Robert Lang. Radio Free Europo, New York
Mr. Charpentier
Mr. Robert J. More
CZESNO LOUAK AIMANO
Mia Augustine reported that the Council of Free Czechoslovakia and
the National Committee of Free Czechoslovakia, composed of 17 and 1 persons
respectively, had signed an acrement in New York City on January 15, 1952,
which bear the sigimtimes of Maseru. Heidrich, (lizek, Lettrich, and Zenkl.
(Copy of this agr cent is herewith attached).
Mad Margus Ling advised that Mr. Klizsok bad reprisented lir. Papnek
in si ning the agreement. The agent, liss Awstime pointed out, sets up
a provisional munascunt, of Czechonlowk affaire consisting of two administrators
ons from each group. Hr. Holdrich represents the 17 of the Council of Free
Czechoslovakia, and Hr. Papraæk will represent the 13 of the national Co:mittee
of Free Czechoslovakia. The provisional management also consists of a body of
24 persors – 12 from each side and which, Kis Augustine reported, might be
called a caretaker body”.
-
Hiss Augustine also presented another document which is a protest of
the Council's 17 against the Committee's 13, insisting on the exclusion of Dr.
Qusly from 8:5′ najor function. However, at a subsequent meeting of OPT's
a:gʻ
Suboo mittee with reprcomitatives at both groups, Ir. renil caterorically
advised that he and the Condites of 13 had no question isoover over the

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_123.jpeg ---
14-00000
**n, the Secret Police
attested Milada brought her to
thut beadquarters questioned
wcasingh for 56 hours
Though they refused he timat
and water, she would now to lont
"
on bei plex of mumsence, tim
In the was dispest, and concr
inta a tdse confession of gudt
F
Since they were unable to get
esidence against her, the Com-
munist Secret Police brutally
tortured an innocent man,
forced him to sign a "contes
ston” which would implicate
Milada Horakına,
The "fixed" judges sentenced her
to death. All Czechoslovakia is
horrified. I wave of revulsion
sweeps the free world. Protest
mettings are held and petitions
directed wen to Stalin,
Now, after six months in pris
-
beaten and tortured -
Milada bravely faces the Com
munists. Fearlessly, she con'
dudes, “I oppose the so called
Peoples' Democracy in the
Czechoslovak Republic, for 1
hold that it not be democratic.
I have worked against it.
Should the mirade occur and
the court find me not guilty
and I be released. I should
work against it anew."
1
The Communists did what the Nazis never dared to
do. On June 27th, 1950 Milada Horakova was hanged.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_128.jpeg ---
14-00000
ļ
T
+
1.
-4-
the opinion of the National Court diaton that this issue should not bo
forved at this 11e, but mther dovolen monta would be allowed to crystalize,
and that we sixxii sail to Ben idat actual progresu in mde.
QUISITAR AYA
AMATE
Ifice Augustine reported that Honors. (afoncu and vinciam had met
and had retained carlier views on the type of organization to be established
for the representation of fusonian affairs in exile; their agreement appeare
not to be within the realm of possibility at the pressit tim. Mis Augustine
also made knusm to the meeting the contents of a letter written by Hr. Cafenou
to one of his friends in which he charged tint ur. Visoianu desired only one
political and mitional boty milch should represent the Rugmnian cause abroad,
and that this body ahould be the present National Committee, under it. Visolamu'a
presidency. Mr. Cafeomutu lo ter also advised that 10. Visodanu is opposed to
a largo Intioral Corcil, although he would agave to setup & special commisiong
coxneed of portes outside the Coulitis. 23 on the other hand alaing
that he Brelm an organisation in exile within a wide nanowork, which would
have a representativo chincter, and to honded tự an elected chairman, Mr. Calenca
indicated that he was not exposed to the King's cause and that, in fact, ba
wished to see the Aqal question intimately bound to that of the mholɛ exile
comunity. Cafeneu charged that Visolami and his gr up, by negotiating only
on the basis of the King's a: proval, instead of reaching agrvoment prior to
the King's approval, United critician not only of themselves, but places the
King's position in jeopardy.
Was Augustim herself also advised that the meeting of January 23
beturen Visoiam and ("engu ms much as rafenou had Unlimatod; 1.8., with
hammary
regard to the chainanship, radiocu trail be the haextury chair:mn, Visoianu
the ohmiıvan, and put nou the vice-chairan. Visciary had alou offered
1
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
9:
i
20 March 1952 W
MUNGPANISH FOR: Chief, Toutheastern Europe Division
Chief, Eastern Europe (ivisim
•UJUCT
Future of Strasbourg Free Prope
University Studenta
1. Attached hereto is a eory of a lot'es
forwarding to Ur. Tyson on this subject.
2. Chief EF is on record as having advised
former case officer of TFT: NIC that FX should be
afforded an opportunity for evaluation and covert
screening of students of origin for future potential
operatimal ure, on the understanding that no student
would be apt roached for this program di ring his scimmled
torn at the University. ‘E probably has a similar
interest in this metier.
3. This randum
informed on a continuin
to to sok that y a beep as
basis of your views on teic abject,
and als: to let you boo that you can expect from us the
information which shall come to us in reply to the attach-
ment.
h. Any comments which you now have on this subject
and would rive to me either informally me ty by
15 April, would be appreciated.
Attachment
Cro/MaVibly
Distributions
Orig & 1 » Addreases
1 - CIO
RI
- Project file
TH. FRATES
Chief
Intern ti nal Organisations Division
:
i
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_129.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 5 -
unification of the two (oups on a 7 to 5 basis - tim: 7 omior from Viselanu's
rupe in
Ruanian intimal to mi too, lo reference of the which had been
al (4:3 zač
i
one of the min basa ɗ contention #fthe split.
foals
18:a kurpesáns advised of a weting batatan Hr. C. 7. Jackmon and
Concral Maduvcu in stich, aizng other things, the Corral complained that he
ma being excluded from Punnian diaqwalon in NOT oireins, and questioned
the advisability of serving Vioolanu to London along with Galenou, Badescu
alaise that his Free Furnian League is having great success. The General mo
informed that the invitation to go abroad to Finolanu and Cafencu had emanated f
from the Europran Sovezant Conference itself, and tnt, in NCFE conversations
with representatives of Rumunian prvapo, there had never been any qustion of
eliminating madcom. The importance of unity among ailes was pointed out to
Badescu, and he ves informed that something had to be done about the situation
of the Rumanians-in-i xile.
Mian Augustine advised the meeting that due to oireisstances, Visoianu
and Onfsnou had found therwolves saloduled to fly on the sum plane to London;
a
Offensa Ind protested vita ummmngemunt bitterly, on the pround, that Vioolam
would represent this situation an one in which in (Visošanu) had been able to
being Carencu along, on the former's immistoon.
fr. Canyball raised the question as to wat can be done about this.
15 painted out that in this Rumanian split Visalama considers that his friante
are in the State Departmnt, ani govs to Stato fre advice and su port, whereas
Cafencu Bends in letters to Itate, but carries his caure to SCPT in New York,
where he believes his friends to be.
#r. Lloyd interfected that in considers ocem vory stringent action
must be done about this whole ſtuanian situation, and that unity somehow not
be achieved, he surested that with the curing into effice of Admiral Miller

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_131.jpeg ---
14-00000
-7.
DULCARIA,
Vamily, it was agreed that 115. Reolențal's remymnisation plan
ɗf the 'ulgation tational Council was roudly, it wouli ho presented at the
ne:st wring.
to
tiza Augustine marrimed in the folliarly; te:ts, the altuat Lon
of the Socialist Parties an! “redo \mia-in-Exile and the Christian Isocratio
parties of the Trade linians-in dila; and advised of the antiquities in this
altution. She indicated that in this present situation:
1. There are in existences
a) On the Socialist sids
(1) The political-party organiaction:
the Soolalist Union of Central and Eastern Europe.
(2) The professloral-trade union organisation:
the International Center of Free Trade Unionists.
13 zile.
t
and that
:
I
3
b) on the Christian Duratio bide there are:
(2) Than political pirty organisation:
the Christian Terpantic thin of Central
Europi.
(2) The professional-trude unic organisatione
the Central uropean Federation of Christian
Trado Union.
i
She pointed at that
2. NC gives fimicial suport and "recogn tim” to the Socialists on the
professioṇal and trade union level through the International Conter of Pres
Trade Unionists in Exile and has done so since September 1951. HCFR gives
financial sxport and "recognition" to the Christian Democratie olenxunt on
the politiml-party level through the Christian Desocratic Union of Central
Furope which it has ou; ported since January, 1951

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_130.jpeg ---
14-00000
U
- 6 -
"
as the new President of NCT, it might be the time to take up the matter again
with a new personality fresh on the scene, and that in such a way it could
conceivably be possible to get over the hup aº the present deplorable situation.
Mr. Carpball agmented thereto.
MITICAUFIS
Mr. Vodoler advised the meeting that the cripial decision rogirding
the future of the Baltic brandu-nta mot stand, and that it me out of the
quetio n that we should becco Involved in any further propoznals reganding
187 bandonata to that art. This mo apulained to . Lang, who ins hid some
definite reocreations on BC brudents to the mitic countries3 »
Ik. Vudalır pointed out that to considered de Baltie panelo, however,
must be maintained and that to prooed now with the dissolution of these parala
would tave a mot curious affect on our Baltic friends,
Mr. Campbell mised the question as to what should be told the Baltic
diplomata, and mat had already been told then. After tousing this subject
around for some time it we agreed that the sults muld be told simply that the
Faise of Amrica is going to accept full responsibility for broedonate to their
country, and wry simply that FE had agreed that this is the way it should be
donc.
Mia Augustine advised that Hr. Laich wuld shortly be tack fron
Europe, nad would be able to aport Strut-hand to the weting of davulopments at
the Polish cafɩræked in Ingland. She advised that the Polish Socialists ind
adopted a brood resolution uhare in the principni a“ cœperation with the Polish
Political Council tas a-cupiliishod, and wherein te dar ind bɩɩn left open to
work with Ilala Jezyk.
MÁZNÁ Ugustino advised that Mr. Loraki mad, contrary to the original
plan, fually been sent to the Conference of the Malish Political Council.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_127.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
1
- 3-
At this time, kinaugustine advised, the Czechoslovaks are still
meting in separate (rago, but that the morer in expected to tako place
very shortly. She further advised that I. Zankl lnd announced his Commitice's
thự
indebtedness to the tum of 2 to $3,00; tr. Vedeler advised that
be and received no corination of the allegation that the Zankl co-risteo
Ind disposition of independent funn in Switserlami.
Who Augustine advised that 111 to Subco sitter idil continue in
existence, and this is will be available for advice and assistance to the
Geschoslovak provisional a nintetentore, and the body of 24.
Mi-e Augusting also advised that the now financial arrangements
were left to the decision of Her's Eubcondtice, and that no new move in this
reyard would be mdo by the Subcommittee until an accounting of all funds bad
been given, and that financial aid will be allocated on the merits of the caso
at that time.
Ir. Vedeler raised the question of the individual stigende, and
the mating was informed that unless there in som further change of policy,
those stiprie are contirating and will continue as in the past.
The meeting, wo inform that the smelled (sechoolovak kükidle
Class party recusantatives have been excluded from the provisional boch, of 26,
(and advised tint the exile lauler, Mr. [v stika, mu Mikely to ruino a good deal
of nodse about the mole thing. Wie Augustine awristed that, as a member of
the Knights of inita, ho up toườn or less expectal to stir up the stole
hierarchy.
Ir. Bore raised the issue sa to the duration of the provin.onal
agreement, and questioned as to whether any time limit and been set within
which the administratore and the body of îh would settle their differences
and establish a permanent organimation, Rita Augustine replied that it was
i
2

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_132.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
Les Augustine advised that
3. so far as alio knows the Sosialist Union of Central and fastern Lurope
(founded in June, 1951) has never a, proached NGFT. for my port and for
moopitium. In Cotober 1951 the Central European Poderation of Christian
Trade Unions was formed and soon after approached IT for support.
1 meter to this a paych, aut just prior to his deputure for Eurove, Laza
Semen, who is a rembatim of later and trude union affaire And
who is in mria veure to las reeporn Wility for the interational tenter £
Free Trade fondata in Exilo, stated that it won hin impression that the
Polish Christian Trude "hions are the only Christian Trade Inions of any pre-
Har significance in the cuntries now behind the Iron Curtain and that is
farther investigation justified this view, he thought, nodent support ought to
exte::ded abroad to the Polish Christian "rade Unions. Ha auniited to little
Inculadge of Christian Trade Unions.
That the Central European Federation of Christian Trade Unions is composed
of axles residing in the United States or Canada and not abroad, which thevas
another nonkng wrench into the situation. At time of the approach to LPE of
the Gristian Trude Union Federation their representative mo told of Dennan's
existence and his existence atroud, and of his need for statistics, information,
of De men's initial view that su pat should be abroad and not here,
statistics were forthcoting, but Sieniewies (Secretary-Genial of the Christian
Dacustic) me activo, aymowitly stirring up Am rican Catholic atrales by
lasping on the them that NOT allowed foufalists to mongèlise trude mion
Stalb.
off
(Sianionicz
Miss Aupurtine advised that we do know in a prot.ched Ceorge Dunhue of
1
Asrican Catholic Trade Unions (who clue, if anyone we do not know), and that
be a pare: tly stirred Xxahue up quite a bit, but Derature contacted Ld. Akinle,
on the Crusade, who maraço! to save the situatian,
Sieniawias a;parently

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_133.jpeg ---
14-00000
-9-
remembered the effect on NCFT. of attacks from certain Catholic circles.
HCFE was at one time in bad situation vis-a-vis hierarchy.
Miss Augustine surmed up Mr. Dennon's views in his letter of December 28,
1951, as follows,
1.
We should aid Polish Christian Trade Unions, but not
Central European Federation of Christian Trade Unions.
Another Christian Democratis Exile Trade Union international is
already recognized by International Federation of Christian Refugee
Exiled Workers, not Confederation of Christian Trade Unions.
2. Question of basic policy contenda probably no Christian Trade
Unions of any significance (except Polish) in Eastern European countries
prior to Soviet occupation. Hr. Dennen raised the question of why help
refugees establish organizations-in-exile which have no counterparts in
their own countries.
3. Another Polish Exile Christian Trade Union group (Felika Mikolajczyk)
recognized by CFTC (French approval of JCCTU).
:
T

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_134.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
COF
The delegation of the Council and the National Comte of Free
Czechoslovakia, mare of the great importance for the Caochoslovak cause
of a united political leadership of the Czechoslovak democratic exile, have
discussed in a number of metinga a complex of ¡olitical and organisational
matters and have agreed unanimously on the following i
1) the statutory organs of the Council and the Fational Comittee of
Free (sechcolovakia respectávaly mill sumpend all their activities by
January 15, 1953,
inain
3) affective the uare day, a provisional two-immber` mraṛement of the
affairs of the unified Czechoslovak desxematic axils will be established;
3) similiamously, a body will be not up with the duty to discuss
and prepare, on the Ixsis of the results of deliberations betmen the two
delegations, the formulation of the political program and the organisation
of the unified Csechoslovak democratic exile. The said body will be composed
of an equal muber of representatives of the Council and the Rational Coʻrittes
of Free Czechoslovaida respectively;
4) the function of the delegations of the Council and the National
Comitire of Free Czechoslovakia respectively will cease with the establish-
ment of the provisional mnagement of the unified Conchoslovak dauneratio
exile.
:
The Zori, M.Y., Janne W, 1972
Signed by: Hoidrich, Lettrich,
Klink, Zonkl
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_135.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
SUBJECT:
CONFI NTIAL - SECURITY INFURMATI
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Memorandum of Conversation
:
i
S/P
/Po
A-88
DATE:
January 25, 1952
Question of RFE Broadcasts to the Baltio Countries
HFL
PARTICIPANTS:
COPIES TO:
Lithuanian Minister Povilas Zaucikis
Mr. Anatol Dinberga, First Secretary of the Latvian Legation
Mr. Harold C. Vedeler
Mr. Willard Allan
-
EE
-
EE
P - Hr. Sargeant
Hr. Devine
OIB/NY Mr. Kohler
S/P - Mr. Joyce
EE Mr. barbour
.. PICE
10-61150-1
In accordance with the conclusions resched at the resting
of kesers. Lohler, Devine and Veceler on January 18, an effort
had been mace earlier this week to wall in the Lithuanian
Minister and the Latvian Chargé d'Affaires at the same time.
Since the illness of the latter prevented, it was finally
necessary to have the First Secretary of the intvian Legation
to come rather than kr. Feldmans.
•
'
It was explained that the visitors had been asked to come
to the Department so thuit the matter of Baltio language broad-
easts might be discussed in responce to their recent notes
(Lithuanian note No. 2433 dated December 31, 1951; Latvian note
unnumbered dated January 3, 1962, and astonian note No. 77¢
unted January 8, 1952) and oral representations on this subject.
Mr. Vedel r said that the problem had been reconsidered frou
every standpoint by all officers with a direct interest in it
and the various points raised by the baltio diplomatic representa-
tives had been carefully stualed. As a result of this review
the Department could see no other course but to reafirm its
previous position. The Lepartment therefore had reached the
definite conclusion that in the inter-sts of the most efficacious
overall effort so far as broado.ting to the baltio countries
with which Americans vere connected was concerned, it should be
confined to a single operation in VOA. The reasons for this
conclusion were reviewed and the painstaking offerte of the
CONFIDENTIAL - SECURITY INPURKATI UN
Department
IAN 21 195.
'
F
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_138.jpeg ---
14-00000
j_
"TRANSMITTAL SLIP
297an
32
DATE
TO:
T. W. Braden
BUILDING
ROOM NO
REMARKS: Re: PP 2 - Amcompe
Bob Lany agreed with H. For
in my presence that amper could
have RF.E.", 10KW station at
Lampertheim.
Ros.
no longer to
a could the
z
RFE transmite provided the peque
was changed & RF2 not identifing
with anom. Perhaps it.
zes this
FROM:
BUILDING
FORM NO
SEP 1948 36-8
18x
ROOM NO.
EXTENSION
1
47
i
S

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_137.jpeg ---
14-00000
F
:
✓
10.
11.
12.
7.
8.
1
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
+181
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across sheet
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
DE
-
_TO
Mr. Foor
8.
"PY-CIO
PY-CIO
DATE
ROOM
NO
REĆ D
FWD D
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
'Fcb. NYP
1
DATE
31 January 1952
COMMENTS
F
Henry:
You will remember that, as
Gates Lloyd points out in his
transmittal slio that Lang agreed
to the use of facilities.
I take it that somebody didn't
do a very good job of explaining to
the Executive Committee of NCE
precisely what was wanted, and you
may wish to be certain that a little
preparatory work is done by McCluny
or others before a formal request
is made.
Will you send the enclosures tack
to me.
JWB Tom
Toin
TWB
phone,
Returned per our
talk today. Unter I hear & the
contrer
I will assume
that
in
our Russian Committee is
to proceed as agreed with the
me of
the
Lampertheim site
and other RFE facilities.
imhindrally negotiated, always
similar pre-
7
show
of use
gulies..
Heimy
ORM NO. S1-10
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_139.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
:
'
:
ECRET
Security Information
ER-2-5236
24 January 1952.
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director (Plans)
FROM
SUBJECT
3 Deputy Director Central Intelligence
N.C.F.E.
1. I attach a letter I have just received from
John Hughes, Chairman of the Executive Committee of N.C.F.E.,
with
regard to certain decisions of the Executive Committee
which he felt were of interest to their sponsors.
2. After you have read this, will you kindly pass
it on to Gates Lloyd and Tom Braden?
ALLEN W. DHLIJ
Attachment (1) Letter to Mr. Dulles
from John Hughes dtd 18 Jan 52
(2 pages)
SECRET
Security Info- nanor
:
E

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_136.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONFIDE IA. - SECURITY INFOTH TIG
020
:
Department to proceed fairly and in the best interests of the
common struggle against Communism in the Baltic countries were
stressed. It was indicated that since the NCPE med asked the
Department for its opinion on the noviembility of proceeding
with plans for H broadcasts, the Department mac conveyed
these views to NUFE. It was our understanding that RCFE had
also come to this conclusion.
Minister Zadeikis expressed his regrets and those of the
Baltic Panels that this was the decision reaches. He was still
concerned that the Baltic exile leaders would nɛve no opportuni-
ty to speak to their homelands and that this denial in view of
the availability of RFL facilities to exiles of the entellite
countries of Eastern Europe represented a change in US polloy
toward the Baltic states. Pr. Vedeler strongly emphasized that
our policy toward the Baltic countries remained unchanged and
that no political significance whatsoever could justly be rønd
into the Department's desire to see the maltic langage programs
carried only by Vua in the endeavor to make the bro=coasting
activities for the Baltic countries as forceful and effective
as possible. It was sugreated (in accordance with the possi-
bilities pointed out by Mr. Kohler in the meeting on January 18)
that there would be opportunities for Baltic exile lescers to
speak over VOA.
Minister Zadelkis asked want provision has seen sade or
might be made for the employment of persons already en, aged for
FE radio work and for the use of raulo material already prepareu
by the baltic Panels. In response to direct questions it was
sugested that probably something could be done to take care
of these matters through discussions between NCFL and VCA repre-
sentatives in New York. The question of cooperation between VUA
and exile lesders and between Von and the baltic Fanels was
discussed at some length. Vɩn's sinoere deªire is receive and
make use of helpful comments and cuestiona, to the extent
that these might fit into the planned ro; rama, was reiterated.
It was agreed that these v rious questions could best of
pursued further if the Baltic representatives tock then up
directly with the VCA in New York.
.
A letter h s also been sent to Fr. Alev, Acting Consul
General in charge of Lokation at how York, Inforain, him of
1 our wish to discuss this matter on the next occasion when he
comes to wington.
EURIZE:HCVedeler/al
January 28, 1982
CONFIDENTIAL - BEGUNITY INFORMAÏ….§

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_142.jpeg ---
1
A
14-00000
SECRET
ecurity Information
24 January 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Chief, PI/OPC
FROM
SUBJECT
Deputy Director Central Intelligonce
CRUSADE budget
Please see attached letter from Abbott Washburn
with his attached budget. I imagine that the Project Review
Committee should go over the figures for the balance of the
fiscal year and for 1952-1953 as soon as possible.
ALLEN W. DULCES
Attachment (1 w/1 attachment)
Budged encored
wich Staff Study
3/21/32 193
}
Executive Registry
2-5272

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
www
2.
In reply refer W-1927
tes
20 Farch 1952
Fear Leverings
I have read with ruch interest the account you rece:tly
sent to Mr. "awed on the University in "trasbourg.
I hate also noted that in a recent Fund Memorandum
- (NC. 5), tha que tien vus raised as to what should be demo
with the Stru-bourg stuents after they have our leted their
studies, should nɔ ɔ tortunity prosent itrølf for their
return to "11b-rated" countries of their origin.
In any case, this question will be of cortinuing concern
to both your organisation and oure, and I hope that we may be
martanlly helpful in plansʻng hoy va can make use of these
students after the completion of their studies in Strasbourg.
Towards this effort se should appreciate receiving from you
a list of the present student body at trapbourg together
with (ographical data as expected to pleti no stuty d. tes
for each. We chall also like to have a statement as to the
tyrs of contract antonal into with the students and in to any
obligation i posed a those who enroll. I should like to
discuss this question with you from time to time and vertious
larly after receiving the information herein requested,
My continued west wil bes
CTO/N Viblj
Distributi as
Adressee - Addre.see - 1
- CIO
2 - RI
1 - Freject file
Sincerely,
Oilver Hadwood

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_141.jpeg ---
14-00000
f
Mr. Allen W. Dulles (continued)
Page #2
political implications, in any way harm the current Munich operation
of R.P.E. or the BONN contract negotiations in the eyes of the BONN
government", we were assured by all that it would not.
For your further information, the operating officers of R.F.E.
in charge of the project for this Polish programing, have been directed
to proceed slowly in implementing the action of the Executive Committee
and watch the situation most carefully until such time as Phenix and
Kempner have had time to receive proper assurances that negotiations
with BONN will progress satisfactorily.
Sincerely,
Jobe
This C Hughes.
JCH: PM

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_144.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
T
(When Filled In)
DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE
SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT
to Discuss the
Meeting
Code for Freedom
in Mr.
hel
RI FILE NO.
DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
3. DISPATCH OR SOURCE DOC SYMBOL NO.
Dept. of St
State
Mr. bahitt's office 17 Jan 52 7. SOURCE TO DATE OF INFO
5. ANALYST
DATE PROCESSED
10. 0155EMINATED IN
8.
DATE
I
21 Jan. 52
EVALUATION
12. CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE
DOCUMENT DISPOSITION
13. TRANSFERRED TO
AI FILE NO.
PERTINENT INFORMATION
THIS REFERS TO
FILED L
707 C
SECRET DOCUMENT
TOL
SECTION BY 1568189
FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.
867 *** P*LUIBUS COATLONI.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_143.jpeg ---
14-00000
January 23, 1952
1
$
}
Dear Allen:
At the Crusade Board Meeting; last Friday, C... reported in detail on our
meeting in Ed Barrett's office.
This was followed by a general discussion of the nature and scope of the
1952 Crusade program. Briefly, there was agreement that the program in
19 should be considerably reduced in scope, that the emphasis should be
taken off publicity and placed on fund-raising with the promotional period
being reduced from two months to two or three weeks. It was felt that a
direct mail campaign to our present list of givers plus a thorough
solicitation of corporations
--
would be desirable.
--
"
There was discussion also of a one-night house-to-house canvass, nation-wide,
on Constitution Day next September. Mr. Poole suggested that, in addition to
Radio Free Europe, the 1952, Crusade might place emphasis on the newly formed
Free Europe University in Exile at Strasbourg. France. General Clay
recommended that the Advertising Council's assistance in the new campaign
be sought at the earliest moment.
I have reported the above to John Damewood
submission of a budget.
--
also your instructions on the
$450,000 was the estimated figure which we mentioned to you as adequate to
cover the entire operation. After careful study and all possible paring,
the total budget submitted herewith amounts to $488,991
this to be
spread over the eleven remaining months of 1952.
Of this total, $212,270 would fall in the present fiscal year (5 months at
$44,454 per month).
1
The total budgeted figure is slightly more than a quarter of the cost of the
1951 campaign. With the ground work that has been laid during the past two
drives, it should realize at least as much as the campaign just completed,
although this, of course, is difficult to estimate.
We have had further talks with the VOA people, and the "Crusader" supplement
devoted to the Voice will appear next week. They seemed very pleased about
it.
:
Best regards,
Sincerely,
1
:
Abund
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_140.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
+7 4
January 18, 1952
Mr. Allen W. Dulles
P. O. Box 1513
Main Post Office
Washington, D. C.
Dear Allens
At a meeting of the Executive Committee of the Board of N.C.F.E.
held on January 3rd test, the members felt that two of the subjects
discussed at that the should be called to your attention so that you
might know the views of the Committee in the event these matters were
brought before you at a later date.
The first concerns e sugestion which apparently came informally
from McCluny and others in Amcomfree, that if means could be found to
do so, they be allowed to use some of the R.P.E. facilities in Germany
for certain of their broadcasts. Since this matter was not brought up
as a formal request, no action was token by the Committee, but the in-
dividual members unanimously expressed the opinion that this would be
most inadvisable and that they would be opposed to the use of R.F.E.
facilities for this purpose even if time and frequencies were avail-
able, which is not at ell certain. Since Amcomfree is an organizetion
in which you have direct interest it seems advisable to acquaint you
with our feelings in the matter should you or your organization be
approached by McClury or others on this subject. Without going into
details at this time as to the reasons for our feeling in the matter,
our main concern is that Amcomfree's targets ore entirely different
from those in which we are interested, and from the standpoint of
operation from Germax soil they are far less likely to be agreeable to
BONN. We are fearful of putting in jeopardy a presently successful
operation and four to five million dollars of equipment by the intro-
duction of a project which we feel should be kept separate and apart.
The other matter which come up for formal action involved the
advisability of undertaking Polish programing in Germany, and the
Executive Committee unanimously agreed that R.F.R.. should proceed
with the plans presented. In brief, such plans call for the origina-
tion of from three to four hours daily of Polish programing from Munich
beginning on or about May 1, 1952, and the introduction of some 50 to
60 Poles into the city of Munich for work with P.F.E. to carry out
this schedule.
Since this is a major step in the development of R.F.E. program-
ing and more particularly because of the forthcoming negotiations be-
tween representatives of N.C.F.E., HICOG, and BONN, it was felt that
you should be formally advised of this decision. The Executive Com-
mittee also wanted to go on record to the effect that while they
realized the risks involved, affirmative action was taken as a result
of opinions given by Messrs. Byroade, Kellermain and Strauss of the
German Desk, Department of State, and by Mesars. Stone, Lewis and
Boerner of HICOG. In answer to the specific question "Would in your
Judgement the introduction of Polish broadcasting with all of its

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_145.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
***
SECRET
->
SECURITY INFORMATION
January 21, 1952
1
Prais
23372
Dear C.D.:
Following up our meeting, we are going to name John Devine
to represent us in discussing further plans for the Crusade of
Freedom.
As I understand it, all parties feel that the Crusade should
be continued, that the next campaign should be of a low-pressure
and short duration type, and that joint efforts will be made to
find other useful activities that the Crusaders can perform for the
total 1.3. propaganda effort.
It was good seeing you the other night, and both Hason and I
enjoyed that long talk. Please remember me to Min Miller and tell
him I wish his the best in his difficult mit fascinating assignment.
P.S.
All the best to you.
P
-
SP
Cortially,
Wisner L
. Jevine
+.
->>
Mr. Joyce
Elvarl W. Barrett
As I understand it, it is tentatively proposel that the two
individuals working with John Devine will be Jim Lambie and Tom Braden.
tr. C.D. Jackson,
National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc.,
350 Fifth Avenue Room 3m,
->>>
New York 1, New York.
SECRET - SECURITY NORMATI FOR
P:EW:arrett,mby

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_146.jpeg ---
14-00000
"">
CONI DENTIAL
RESTRICTED
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
FREE
INSTRUCTIONS.–Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn
across sheet and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial
(check mark insufficient) before further routing. This Record and Routing Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
ID/COLLECTION AND DISSEMINATION BRUNCH
PATE
TO-
ROOM
NO
RECEIVED
FORWARDED
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
DATE
JOA
COMMENTS
2.
W3
3
EES
J.
EE.2
EE/IS
EεlpW
6.
"
Knoth
MAR
1952
MAR 3 1952
--
SE/PC/11 MAR 1950
7.
Py/15
Byleol
9.
P
[By Bud
10.
8/
Py/10
2010
K
K
09
ma
KB
F/SON
Mex
...
2
Baldridge
alconia Buljana Ruano
yougplane
Breitweise NH
NOTE: ID/CD does not retain
this document on file. Any
interest in retention should be
noted on this routing and it
will be returned to you.
Lacking request for return,
THIS DOCUMENT IS TO FE DESTROYED
BY THE LAST NED FINIFIENT.
U in Eccle fill out 20 (131) arti
12.
13.
this in files - H
...
14.
15.
51-9
FREE
RESTRICTED
CONFIDENTIAL
1
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED
CONFIDENTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TO. AND-BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
1
TO
1
2
3
4
Miss Viccellio
300-07
INITIALS
DATE
5
FROM
CIO
INITIALS
TWB
DATE
18 Mar
-
2
3
APPROVAL
☐ ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
REMARKS:
INFORMATION
☐ DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
FILE
Are any of the officers of this organi-
zation on our cleared consultants list?, I
believe you understand the situation, which
is that it may be a good thing to try a direct
approach to this group on behalf of NCFE.
Mr. B
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
No. Sir
30.4
CONFIDENTIAL
Nawers
RESTRICTED UNCLASSIFIED
I
A

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_148.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
}
FROM
:
30
145
SUBJECT:
RESTRICTED
{Classication)
FOREIGN SERVICE DESPATCH
: TIK DEPARTMENT OF STATK, WASHINGTON,
DIS. NO,
:
OT TYPE IN THIS SPACE
H
PRIORITT
For Dept.
l's Only
R
K
2 Strasbourg 195
C
D
Age
19
Momen
Zebal
A
C
T
20
2
2
1
8
0
8
N
10%
24
6
1
25
3
12
26
0
8
27
- Z & 0
N
28
11
2
1
Totals
76
11
87
24.3
Average Age 25.5
As of possible interest there are enclosed copies of the first two
pages of the interim report of the Committee on Awards and Placements to the
Chairman of the Board of Trustees, The Free Europa University in Exile, New
York, H. Yup which was furnished to me confidentially by Mr. Malcolm Davis.
Preys & And
George D. Andrews
American Consul
Enclosure: As Stated
Distribution:
AmEmbassy, Paris
L
1
PREPARATIO
REPORTER.S

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_147.jpeg ---
14-00000
RESTRICTED
FOREIGN SERVICE DESPATCH
(Clanification)
FROM
AmConsulate, Strasbourg.
136
TOP PYPE IN THIS SPACE
940./11-1551
XB 740.09
November 15, 1951
DESF NU.
70
THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON,
AIR POUCH
692312
REF
None.
25
For Dept.
Live Only
SUBJECT Founding of "Lo Collège de l'Europe Libre" at Strasbourg by the National "NOV
Comittee for a Fres Europe.
E 19
D
ACTION
^ ELÉ
C
T IMPO
O OLI
As the Department is aware, the National Committee for a Free Europe han
founded at the Château de Pourtales, Strasbourg Robertsan, "Le Collège de
1° Europe Libre" (College of Free Europe) in which students of mins different,
nationalities, all of them from the Satellite countries, are ledged and feq.
All of the students are taking courses in the University of Strasbourg and
in future there will be additional courses at the "Collage de l'Europe Libre” ♪ IK
conducted by professore-in-exile in the languages of the various countries
represented. The purpose of the College is to train political leaders,
USUA
doctors, lawyers, engineers, etc., fær service in the Satellite countries
when and if these countries are ever liberated from Soviet Russian domination. Cadil
So far there are no students from Russia or East Germany in the College,
On November 12 Mr. Roudybush and I attended the opening ceremony of the
College, which was informal but impressive; other persona attending included
Mr. C. D. Jackson; President of the National Committee for a Free Europe,
three officials of the Council of Europe, Professor Robert Redsløb, Dean of
the Faculty of Law at the University of Strasbourg (representing the lestar
of the University, who was ill), personnel from Radio Free Europe at Munich,
and the student body. Speeches were made by Hr. Malcolm Davis, Dean of the
Callego, Monsieur Redslob, and Mr. C. D. Jackson,
There follow tables showing the distribution of the students by nation
alities and by ages, as of October 20, 1951, (8 men and 1 vamma students
have been enrolled since then, but their nationalities and ages are not kns-m);
- 2
N
Nationality
Czechoslovak
Polish
Rumanian
14
11
18322
Honey
Ietel
7
Nnanonood 2
2
23
Jassareng &
87
23
29
24
Tugoslav
Hungarian
Lithuanian
Bulgarian
Albanian
Latvian
Totals
76
1
Les
☐ RESTRIC THE
INFORMATION COPY
PREPARA'
in
W
}

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_149.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
FROM
i
:
:
RESTRICTED
Klassification)
TOREIGN SERVICE DESPATCH
TO
REF.
SUBJECT:
: THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON,
-
NOT TYPE IN THIS SPACE
UATI
Enclosure to
despatch 136 Dram
American Commis
Strasberres
11/15/11 - 1
For Dept.
I'an Only
R
ENCA
D
C >
T
- OZ
To the Chairman of the Board of Trustees,
The Free Europe University in Exile,
New York, N. Y.
Paris, October 20, 1951
N
I
N
y
Interia Asport of the Committee on Averds and Placementa
The Candittes, having sent out 3530 application forms to individuals
and organizations, first amined applications duly completed by candidates
for Strasbourg and set aside those, out of 626 received, that had been filed
by persons who turned out to be ineligible, e.g. as being over 32 years of
age (with a few comeptions), or already having university degress and nooding
to finish elsewhere, or wishing to study a subject not taught at Strasbourg,
mr not possessing qualifications required by the university, or not knowing
enough French to profit by the Strasbourg university courses, or not having
refuges status. Candidatures which appeared eligible ware then shared ent
between the members of the Committee for personal interview, mostly in Paris,
visits however being made for this purpose to England, Belginn, Germany,
Grosso, Spain, Italy, Turkey, and Switserland.
With applications and notes on interviews before it, the Condities then
held numerous meetings, at which the cases of all eligible candidates were
examined and discussed. Mr. Royall Tyler, as President of the Association
for the College of Free Europe, also attended most of the meetings held by
the Committee and assisted it by his advice. The records showed that a high |
persentage of the candidates, and especially come of the more presising aasa
did not wish primarily to go to Strasbourg but hoped instead to octair
scholarships cabling them to remain in Paris (in most cases), or at sons
other university. Certain problems arising in this connection will be aszit
with below, together with resumendations.
0
Selections Cor Surastong
To date, 87 candidates wishing to go to Strasbourg have boar accepted!
(Note: 8 additional mom and 1 woman have been caralled,
-76 min and li
RESTRICTED
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_151.jpeg ---
14-00000
Jury
1f raida
HEHORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( LANS)
17 January 1352
SUBJECT:
Plans for talargement of the Free University in Exile
REFIRTACE(
Letter from Royal Tyler to DRCI of 15 December 1951
1. At a meeting at the DDCT's house, Washington, D. C., on bunday
morning, 13 January 1752, Pr. Royal Tyler discussed with Feaars. A. W.
Dullon, H. Dates Lloyd and Thomas W. traden, the present plans of the
Trustees of the FUIE as presented at their meeting in New York last week.
2. Reparting the administration of the University, Fr. Tyler reported
that Hr. Dewitt C. Poole's resignation effective 31 March 1952 had been
formally accepted by the Trustees and Dr. Levering Tyson had been elected
Vioo Prezident with full executive powers as of the present. Dr. Kaloola
Davis has not, according to Dr. Tyson, proved an effective administrator
and has been relieved of all non-academic duties as well as membership on
the Awards Committee.
3. Pegarding the future expansion of the University which Fr. Tyler
had reviewed at some length in the referenced letter, the Trustees gave
conditional approval to doubling the number of students during the aca-
demic year of 1952-53. There are now 83 male students living at the
chateau and 13 woren boarding outside. In addition, 31 students have
been awarded scholarships at other universities. Ir. Tyson estimates
that approximately 1/3 of the students at Robertsau will leave at the
end of this academic year for various reasons, and the Trustees expect
to recruit about 35 students to restore the mumber in residence to ap-
proximately 100. In addition, if money is obtained for the necessary
temporary housing, they propose to recruit an additional 100, making 200
in residence at Robertsau. They also sugrest increasing the scholarship
appointments at other institutions to a total of 50.
4. Any such profran would involve a capital outlay of $250,000 on
a 100-bed dormitory and necessary study hall or auditorium. Mr. Tyler
understood that the present kitchen and other facilities will serve a
total of 20% residents.
5. Fr. Tyler

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_153.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
;
1
i
The Rf Copy TOP SECRET
domument-62962
dated 157a 1952
which was removed from this
file, is filed in the RI
TOP SECRET CONTROL SECTION
1305 "L" Bldg.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_150.jpeg ---
14-00000
FROM
:
TO
i
REF
SUBJECT:
RESTRICTED
(Clasification)
FOREIGN SERVICE DESPATCH
THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON.
6411-
12 NOT TYPE IN THIS SPACE
PRIORITY
DATE
}
Enclosure to
despatch 136 from
American Consul,
Strasbourg,
11/15/51 - p. 2
C
C
T
making á total, as of Nov. 12, 1951, of 84, men and 12 women). Notification
of aca-acceptance is being sent to 349 candidates. The Committee has had in
mind the advance estimate that five women ware to be accepted for Strasbourg, N
and that five theological students might be accepted for the Collège des
Cleres., However, only one theological student has qualified for a scholarships
and suitable arrangements can be made to lodge as many as 10 or 11 women,
possibly even 19, (Notes total accepted 12, as of Nov, 12), either in the
Student Home for Girls or in a pension (for the older girls). In view of the
quality of these women candidates, the Committee feels justified in selesting
a member larger than that originally contemplated, and after consultation
with Mr. Delätt Peale and Mr. Royall Tyler does so unanimously.
This grand total of male students already accepted for Strasbourg, and
ascordingly notified, is thus 76 to date, as against 100 originally contemplated,
The Committes has thought it preferable to maintain a high quality, rather
than to make filling a quota the first consideration, especially as applica-
tiens are still coming in and some promising applicants remain to be sem,
Since the French university year begins only in the first week of November,
& good many students ware away when the application forms were sent out aut
their addresses unknown to anyone who could be reached, Arrangement can be
zado tô enter lats comers for the Strasbourg university courses, and so it
eccas nice to allow for the probability that some high-quality candidates
will still appear, none of whom could be accepted if the quota had been
filled up in a hurry regardless of the advisability of maintaining a standa
Applicants can be received and registered in the univeralty as late as Nov. 21,
It is of interest to note that all candidates so far submitted to desas
of famities at Strasbourg have been considered acceptable,
I
*
L
103
RESTRICTED
BEPORTER
Cary
For Dept.
Use Only

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_155.jpeg ---
14-00000
LY
SECRET
ORMATION
17 January 1952
MEMORANDOM FOR: Mr. John Levine
Department of State
SUBJECT:
Nemorandum of Conversation of Meeting at Mr. Farrett'a
Home on November 20, 1951 to discuas USIE and org
Relationships
1. Your memorandum of conversation of November 20, 1951, was
mentioned to as by Mr. Dulles tie morning with particular referenco
to paragraph 2 of the conclusions.
2. Ar. Dulles does not believe that the meeting was quite so
definite on this point as you indicate, and I suggest, therefore,
an mendaont as followes
*2. That pɔssibilities for toning dorm the Crusade
for Freedom to a somewhat less high-pressure and spec-
tacular campaign be carefully explored by all concomed. "
PY-CIO: TWBA
Orig - Addresses
100 - E/D/P (Mr. Hulick)
1 o 1/19
1 00 - FY
100 - CO
TIDEAS W. NHANESI
SECRE:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_152.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
5. Mr. Tyler expressed concern, in which those present concurred,
that the University was making plans for expansion without having definite
information regarding the mumber of acceptable students who would be
available in future years. of the several hundred applicants who were
rejected last year, there were few, if any, who would have been admitted
under any circumstances. It was agreed that a survey should immediately
be made to determine with as much accuracy as possible how many students
can be expected to be available for the University in the next few years.
It was recommended that Dr. Tyson get in touch with Mr. Lawrence Dawson of
the Department of State regarding the number and academic caliber of
escapees currently coming through the Iron Curtain.
6. It was understood that Dr. Tyson would forward to Washington
in the near future detailed estimates covering:
Capital outlay required for the proposed expansion.
b. The operating budget of 1952-53 on the basis of 200
students.
(In this connection, it should be noted that Fr. C. P. Jackson has just
returned from a trip to visit the officials of the Ford Foundation which
be made for the purpose of proposing that the Foundation take over the
FUIE. The Foundation is giving this serious consideration but Mr. Jackson
was reported unwilling to estimate how successful his trip had been.)
7. Pr. Tyler urged that a decision be reached with regard to capital
improvement at Robertsau by the first of February. If delayed beyond that
date, the University will be at the mercy of French contractors working
on an emergency schedule to meet the opening date for the expanded
University next Fall.
8. However, before any conclusions can be arrived at, it would
appear most essential to carry out the survey of available candidates
referred to in paragraph 5. above. Furthermore, Dr. Tyson is arranging
to bring his detailed plans to Washington on 22 January, after which it
will be possible to make a more detailed report as to the costs involved.
At this meeting, the point raised by DD/P regarding the increased dangers
of penetration by Communists will be discussed.
DCPT/HOL1ml
H. DATES LLOW
Deputy Chief
Psychological Staff Division
Distributions
Addressee Original; PT/CIO - 1; DCFY -'1; RI -
- = 2

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_154.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
(Then Filled Int
}
Meeting
m
DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE
SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT
at Ms. Barrett's Hom
Theor. You. 20, 1951
jusit&
to discuss USIE of felation
RI FILE NO.
DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
3. DISPATCH OR SOURCE DOC. SYMBOL NO.
DATE
SOURCE CRYPTOR
6. DATE OF INFO. 9. EVALUATION
ANALYST
867 ***
2.
CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE
DATE PROCESSED
10. DISSEMINATED IN
DOCUMENT DISPOSITION
13. TRANSFERRED TO
RI FILE NO.
PERTINENT INFORMATION
THIS REFERS T
FILED
GET DOCUMENT
SECTION BY TS # 67871
FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.
SECRET
DATE
:
1
AS

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_156.jpeg ---
14-00000
.IAN
OTTATLY as
NAM
+35
SECRET
Arary 16, 1952
BUNJI CT; Report on Slavik-in for Conference as outlined by kiss Imry
Augustine at January 9, 1957 meting with State.
Fra
A.J. Moore
#6
Miss Augustine advised that the flavik-injer conference had been
placed on the Agenda, no a result of Kr. Focolar's co ment (made at a
meeting during December, 171) to the of out that it would be desirable
to give encouragement and moral support to the Slavik¬lajer group,
Miss Augustine explained that fagy had received some encouragement
from MFE when (during January 1957) he initially broached his plan for the
establishing of an over-all intermitional grouping of exiles from Central
and Eastern Europe. However, when it became clear to BE that faɛy's group
ima to be formed on exclusively political party lines, and would be dominated
by Agrarian (Peasant) Party loaders and tinus, in affect, a duplication of
the International Peasant Union and other such organisations already in
existeme who are already receiving HCT support, that it could not, therefore,
be broadly representative. HFT, therefore, indicated to Fagy that it could
not provide financial suport for an organization set van such a basis. Mary's
reaction to My's policy mas consequently strong and critical.
As about this same time the Glavki-injer group (now known as this
Central and Eastern European Conference) bogan to emerge and to b com active.
It was composed officially of the so-called "bureaucrats", "diplants", and
"nonpartisan personalitica” which more so despised tỷ Bagy and his colleagueo
from the Agrarian parties and other political party leaders who took their cus
This mm group be an actually to met
from the Teasant Party politicians.
and to perform gerritze work.
:
SPOR

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
EL
=
=+
SECRET
LATION
19 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Crusade for Freedom and National Information Bureau
-SUBJECT:
1. On January 10th I called your attention to the fact that
the National Information Pureau, a reputable investigation agency
which conducts inquiries into charitable organizations and advises
large donors, had given an adverse recommendation on the Crusade
for Freedom (see Attachment 1). Tais matter has now risen again.
It may be that it would be ud se to undertake a high-level approach
to the Bureau through yourself or General Smith, for the following
reasons
According to an agreement with us and with the State
Department at our recent meetings, Crusade for Freedom will bank
heavily this year on donations from corporations. They have now
discovered that these corporations rely to a great extent on the
National Information Eureau's advice. Several corporations have
indicated that, according to their practice, they cannot give to
the Crusade unless it has the blessing of the Eureau, and you will
note in Attachment 2 that one such corporation Barnes Manufactur-
ing Company of Mansfield, Ohio has written to the Crusade citing
its doubt.
-
--
2. Meantime, members of the Crusade have had conversations
with D. Paul Reed, Executive Director of the National Information
Bureau (see Attachment 3) and he has insisted that he cannot report
that the Crusade nas net the basic standards in philanthropy until
his Standards 7 and 8 are met. These are the publication of an
annual audit and of a detailed annual budget, the prime requirement
being the disclosure of totals.
3. You may want to read this Attachment 3 with care but I
cannot myself see any manner in which we can meet these standards.
Therefore, I believe that it may be necessary to make the approach
to the National Information Bureau described alove.
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_158.jpeg ---
14-00000
-30
protest, not merely the protest of a few Central and Lustern i uroptan exiles.
In this way members of our U.S. Mined on would be enabled to cite before the
U.H. Assembly the protest which deportations have elicited from the U.s.
ninority press, quoting articles, etc., which have more of a propaganda
impact than the booklet itself.
}
Originally, Miss Augustine pointed out, the Slavik-in for Conference
had approached NCFE with a proposal that NCNS arrange and finance a luncheon
or a dinner to which various representatives of influential American organiza-
tions, labor, church, educational, etc., would to invited, and at which the
exiles would have an opportunity to resent the facts and their views rogard-
ing deportatios. WT% had at first agreed to this, in princţie, Kiss
Augustine advised, but in view of the protable recriminations from the magy
group (which would, in fact, have some basis of justification) and also in
view of the propaganda approach Bucreated by Williams, the Comitiae had
dropped this idea and was working instead along the lines augested by the
U.. Mission.
bils Augustine acced that in the absence of a mrɛer, or an agreement,
regarding division of fields of competition (the Eary Committee, concentrating
on long-range planning and post-liberation problems; the Slavik-linjer Con-
ference focusing its efforts upon the immediate problems confrunting exiles
in the pre-liberation period) PFT md steered clear of providing financial
support on any continuing basis.
r.
4. Darbour ingred as to the prospects for merger, and whether it
þad biển sảo clear to all calle groge involved that the withholding of NOTE
support ms predicated upon the lack of any unified and broudly representativo
grouping.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_157.jpeg ---
14-00000
A;parently, as the result of the exerrence of the Slavik-knjer
Conference, as an embryo but functioning body, the hagy group sprang into
action, and leaving the planning and organizational stage behind, launched
itself fimily into a big press conference and wich fanfare. This Hary group,
Just to confuse an already confusing situation further, is known as the Contrul-
Taster Furopean Committee, Hire Augustine advised.
NCPT was disquieted by this almost simultaneous exorvence of two
potentially cœvoting organisation and indo it clear to both groups that
financial syport was out of the question until a merger or sœm clear and
acceptable agreement between the two grans, which would bar their coupeting
with each other, should be effected. The Elavilinjer Cafurence, Kiss
Augustine indicated, agreed to seek no large amount of publicity for a timo
in order that the unfortunate and undesirable aspect of competition might
be played dɛwn as much as possible in the hope that a mryer or acceptable
agreement might be forthcoming.
After its initial plunge into the publicity spotlight, the Easy
Committee Bremed to become completely quiescent, while the Slavik-Majer
Conference became increasingly active, performing some geminaly useful work.
Kisalugustine informed the meting that !XFT: had paid for the
booklet în deportations, entitled "huan Freedon is Being Enslaved", and
that Prank Pright, NT Trees Officer, having spoken in Puria with Chester
Williams of the .. 1 sion to the .li., no urged that this booklet and
its exposition of the subject of deportations be civih us much publicity as
posible in the minority press of the U.D., especially the li precs, the
labor press, and the press of other nationality groups thru Central-
Fastern þuropean, so that this would be given the aspect of a broadly-barun

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_160.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFRAZİ
In reply refer to W-1771
3
11 January 1952
Mr. C. D. Jackson
National Committee for a Free Europe, Ins.
110 West 57th Street
New York 19, New York
Dear C. D.1
As promised at our last meeting, here is the text for a new
paragraph 3 of the Himates of the Meeting Held in Washington on
14 December 1951. This was dictated by Oliver E. Hadwood.
"3. Jackson advised that he had a tentative date to
call on the Ford Foundation people in Pasadena on January 8th.
Braden advised that it would be appropriate at that time to
make a strong pitch on the Iron Curtain refugee problem with
the idea that the government was tackling this problem but
needed substantial help from private agencies, and that if
Ford would give a sizable sun to NCPE, which it in turn could
farm out to IRC, it would help to get the ball rolling on a
major psychological warfare problem. Braden stressed that
private initiative was extremely important that if a private
agency acted now, it would speed up the governmental machinery,
He also said that the maximum estimated governmental contri-
bution toward this problem was not expected to be more than
balf the cost.
"Braden also advised that IRC had agreed with David
Martin for Martin to step down from his post as Executive
Director and that the Committee was considering the appoint-
ment of a well-known university president to assume the job.
He said that Martin had agreed to step out of the ploture
altogether if the Committee wished him to do so but that in
any case his role from now on would be minor.
"It was also agreed that this discussion of refugees and
IRC could include the plan worked up by Parle and bolbeare to
turn over to IRC NCFE "non-productive exiles at a cost to HCFR
of approximately $1,000 a hoed."
DCPY/HOLıml
Distributions
Sincerely yours,
John L. Danswood
SECRET
Addresses ->
Original; DCPY - 1: PY/TOLA
-
11 PT/GTO
- 1. DT
->

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_159.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Miss Augustine advised of two rounnt coversations she had had
with Bidzilaulms, and said that when pressed by him for the reason whợ
the luncheon plan had boun dropped, she had at first tried to put this on
a practical basis and on Mr. Wright's Paris conversations and the con
sequent chance of tactics. However, when pressed further, and told by
Sidzikaukas of the rumors of drastic changes of Mir policy, etc., which
would attend the abandonment of this plan, Kiss Augustine advised that
gentleman unofficially that, along with the practical reasons, we had been
motivated by a deuire to avoid the inevitable recriminations from Macy, and
that the lack of a merger or satisfactory agreement between the two group
inge would continue to prevent our material support of their activities on
any consistent or permanent basin. dicunting added that very recently
Sidsimulas had informand har briefly of anting of the tary comittes
hold within the last few days. This muting was attended by, among others,
Visoiamı, Cidziano and Onisky, who have sat on the fence between these
two groups and have attended the mystinge of both groups. Sidnilaulas
believes that agreement to divide fields of competition, rather than a
murger, is shaping up.
1
1
T
:
I
[

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_161.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
STRUDIT.COM NAADI
SECRET
Jamary 10, 1952
3.
TONIC
Tas the
Falbaare
17. J. 7. Reich
From A.J. More
SONJICT: Mapart of meeting; at State Department, rodioday, January 7, 19:2,
ROTE:
Harold
1.
Melɔs thusps Augnatio, M. Cates floyd M. malworth Barbour,
ald C. Tedolo, maghall, r. no Ruchagel,
Mr. Robert J. H 038.
Ios thry Augusting angry Demed the Bar Turk office at the meting
in the absence of M. John F. Leich, tho io in Luropo attending the
Puropean Novonent Concreme.
CHOBLOVAKIS
It was recalled that at the meting on December 26, 1951, discusion
of the Czechoslovak problem had ended on a note af optimism. Miss Augustine
advised that this opticism had been obliterated due to certain unfortunate
airastances which had developed in negotiations bolmen the Czechoslovak
Council mjority of 17 and the Tankl minority of 13. se Augustine in-
dicated that one of the principal stumbling blouls in the (sech situation
is the queation of the co-equal ofnirmanulip in the new setup of two persona,
one a pointed frun each pap. She further advised that a body of 20 peraɑra
divided opmily between the two o paŭg crage would aut as an ad
23
mittee to outablish a nou Chuchoslovak matiral Council, and that, sherma
the 13 wished to appoint fr. Tema as an ac tìm từu duimmn, they həd et
the same tim expressed their opinion thất Dr. Cowly would not be arve;-table
to them as the other co-chairman, or indeed, that he should not em raise any
major function. Such an ultimium appeared uncen;table to the 17 who cone
tended thật negotiations could not be carried on under these circumstances,
Upon receipt of thin nevs, Milsa Augustino pointed out, fr. Fulbeare
of RTF advised the Czechoslovak delegation that he would place the whole
thất
problem before the Board of Directors of WOIT. This was done, and a
JAN 15 1952
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_165.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Furopean Movement Conference. It was hoped that the meeting would actually
take place, but that assurances could not be forthcoming. However, it seemed
reasonable that Mr. Visoianu might make the nove before roing to London where
he would have further consultations with the King. Ma:sre. Visolanu and
çafenau were reported to lave core to sow imple agra suite for the purpose
of maching an understanding between the two factors. Advice was given
that Coneral Padencu would be brought into the acumultations eventually.
Mr. More advised of the opinion held by the National Courell
division of FE that the mis should avoid bring sing into the
negotiations, and rather that an agreement in the form of a fait accuali
should be presented to the King for his approval.
Mr. Carpbell interjected that he had an appointment at that time
with Hr. Visoianu, and that in the light of this information, he would advise
that gentleman not to try to pull "any contemplated schemes which might dis-
rupt the efforts so far taken”. Mr. Farbour requested that Mr. Visolanu bo
informed, in strong term, to avoid further intrigue or unnecessary protracted
disounions. In other wonts "read him the riot sot".
HUNGARIAN ANSATS:
Adina Augustine advised the mosting that it had been necessary to make
Bom drastic changes among the Lungarian personal works for Radio Free Furope
in Mưa York, as their output was considered to be inadequate. She advised that
efforts were being made to reestablish the hungarian dak on a more effective
baris.
BULGARIAN AFFADSI
ki a Augustine advised that Mr. Dimitrov in departing for Furope te
Join the Furopean Lovement Conference, and that he was being obliged to came
to NC77 headypartere to pick up his check for the purpose of the trip.
1
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_163.jpeg ---
"
:
1
14-00000
1
i
-3-
Czechoslovak groups in the controversy.
Mr. Barbour interposed that should the negotiations indeed fail,
and we be faced with a Czechoslovak situation in which there would be no ·
Czechoslovak Council, the whole situation of the National Councils and NCFE
might well need to be reviewed. He pointed out that the NCFZ was based vɩry
much on the National Council idea, and that it is constituted to work on this
basis. Therefore, should this concept fail, it might be expedient to have à
system of some kind of national panel whose members would be appointed by NCFE
to work on the problem of their respective nationalities (presumably within
the dictates and needs of American foreign policy). Hr. Barbour advised that
such persons would have to be chosen on the basis of their ability to work
together, thus avoiding the issues of political strife and partisan interests.
Mr. Hoore surested that the meeting might wish to consider the pro-
indiately
cedure which should follow in the wake of the possible breakdown of Czechoslovak
negotiations.
Mr. Lloyd proposed that the matter be referred to Washington for con-
sideration by his office and the State Department before the Czechoslovaka
were formally advised of the drastic action contemplated by HCFF's Board of
Directors and the subcommittee. There was general agreement that this should
be the case.
BALTIC BROADCASTS:
Miss Augustine reviewed the situation of the Baltic panels in New
York as regards broadcasts by Radio Free Furope. She advised that the Baltic
countries would be represented at the European Lovement Conference by heads of
the New York Baltic panels, and specifically - lessrs. Hassens, Sidzikauskas
and Vahter and that thus funds had been found to carry out the original plan
of sending a representative from each Baltic country to the Xovement Conference.
-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_166.jpeg ---
}
13. Barbour advised that he had not with r. Dimitrov and had given
the Bulgarian un impression that state did not coralder his conduct of affairs
to be in the state of perfection which the gentleman himself so claims. W.
Barbour further advised that he recognized the feeling against Dimitrov among
others working on Bulgarian affairs, and that he understands the basis for this
criticism. ver, he advised that ho doen consider Dimitrov to be the
be he
representative of an important peasant element in Bulgaria, mui that he did
not consider this fact should to ignorai..
Mia Augustine advised that there appeared to be Base difficulty with
Mr. Shipov's papers, a fact which in retarding his arrival in this country.
She further advised of the need for a quoruus an´the Julgarian National Council,
in order to deal with the political altuation which has developed thore,
The meeting received a visit from ir. Reckagel who nevised that he
was working on a new plan for the reform of the Bulgarian Intional comitise.
He advised that he expected to have the report ready at the time of the next
meting and requested that the members of the meeting consider the Bulgarian
question in the martine, and should they have any specific ideas which they
should wish to present, they should contact him in the interval. He advised
that he was attempting to draw up a plan whereby mamberahip in the Bulgarian
Committee would be established on an elective basis, and su rested that this
might be a good time to teach them some of the concepts of democratie procedure.
ir. Mrtour advised of his interios in the Bulgarian political lendor
known as Muslarov, air! surrested that some consideration bo, ivan to bringing
this man into Pulgarian exile affaire.
ELAVIK-AJN CAP
Er. Vedaler advised that run should consider the Slavik-la jor
Conference aryanization within the light of its own activities and purposes.
00000-L

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_167.jpeg ---
1
-7.
1
(Miss Augustine outlined the history of the Glavik-imjer Conference
and the conditions which are currently existing therein, A copy of Miss
Aurustine's report will shortly follow this report of the moting with State).
In reply to Miss Augustine's statement that she understood Kr. Vedeler
to Dellevé 10/2 should five support to the Slavicajor Conference, Pr. Vedeler
advised that he considered this suport should take the orm of assistance to
special projects, but that he did not kávocato that susistance should be given
to the Conference on an all-out basis.
ir, farbour advised of his approval of this procedure, and requested
that precautions be taken in order that may not be aroused.
POLISH A13
Miss Augustine advised there was little to report on Polish affairs,
other than to advise of a cable which had been received in New York to the
effect that General Anders had solicited the aid of Count ncaynski to assist in
the formation of the Polish Council of National Unity.
Kr. Vedeler advised that he had spoken to Hr. Joyce regarding a can-
versation which the latter ms presumed to have had with the British in Londen
on cooperation with the U.S. in exile aïfairo.
Ur. Barbour ândicated that he also had a report of Hr. Joyce's dis-
cussions with the Foreign Office, and that the former had found Little British
desire to become involved in the matters of exiled/roups.
Ho su rested that
the British considered this to be an extremly complicated and undesirable
situation which they had wished to avoid.
Mr. Barbour advised that in view of our own record of involvement and
disappointments in this policy, we were hardly in a position to advise the
British that they should follow our example. However, he indicated that within
the next few months the Department wil return to further discussions of this
miler with the British, and indicated that he had hopes of achieving a greater
degree of cooperation and coordination of policies.
(The next metiny will take place on January 23rd.)
00000-+

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_164.jpeg ---
1
24
Itr. Vodeler indicated that he considered this move to be forturats
and appropriate, in view of the upheavel which has occurred in the muter of
the Enltic brondosata. Ho indicated his in linf that if CE in to continue,
it in necombury that our form of itadlo Free Furope broadcasts to Baltie
1 countries be considered. He advised that the Baltic countries considered thero
had been discrimiation against them, and they feel that it is only through AFE
broadcasts that they can really speak to their own people; he advised that he
considered the general situation most regrettable.
Miss Augustine indicated that in New York there was considerable hope
that once the Baltic broadcast question mo straightened out, such situations
be avoided in the future, as it has been rest embarrassing to all concerned,
Land has placed the good faith of NCFE towards the mite in jeopardy.
Mr. Barbour advised that we must consider the Baltic broadcasta to
be currently ruled out. However, he advised further that the matter will to
taken up on the basis of the formal protests loded with the State Department
to
by the Baltic diplontic lesions in this country. He inferred that the whole
situation had become confused due to the unfortunte light in which the Voice
of Americs broadcasts had been thrown, as a result of Hadio Free Furope's
activitie. He made reference to the Crusade for fructon on behalf of Manio
Free Europe, and indicated that the Crusade in this instance had done a great
deal to stir up the public's mind in favor of Hil, to the discredit of the
Voice of Am rion. Finally, he advised, however, that the a rits of the ease
for broadcasts to maltic countries by KFT. would be reconsidered.
ROTANIA,
Miss Augustine advised that there was not a great deal to report on
the Rusanian situation, but that Br. Cafenou had received advice that Hr.
Visciaru would meet with him prior to the latter's departure to attend the
11
00000-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_162.jpeg ---
14-00000
→
xx
-2-
subcommittee ma appointed to examine the situations this comittee is co
posed of tir. F. R. Dolbeare, Dr. Levering Tyean and Mr. Freak Altschul. The
subcommittee was informed by the Board of Directors that, should the Cescho–
slovaks fail to overcome their differences by the end of Jammry, all payments
to the Czechoslovak National Council would coase as of that time. The Board
had agreed, however, that a credit of #25,000, appropriated to the Council,
would retain with it and could be used for su; port during the course of the
following month. It was considered tint these funds woulć act as a hedge
aguinst other outside funds to which Ir. Zenkl appears to have access.
The subconditie met on January 8 with Wears. Lettrich, Heidrich
and Csusky, at which time the principle of the co-equal chairmanship appears
to have been dropped in favor of a system of referend, including Mausra.
Papanek and Heidrich
-
one from each group. Augustine advised that the
subɑɑmi'tae não to mort on January 10 with Dr. Zenkl and comany, and on
Friday with the delegation from both groups. Miss Augustine advised that of
the three members of the subco mittee only Mr. Altschul appeared to carry
any optinion as to the outcome of the negotiation. Ki-s Augustine informed
the meeting of Mr. Dolbeare's opinion that, should regotiations fail;
a) all financial ties would cease with organised Czechoslovak
axile groups,
b) NCPE would be obliged to select individuals as advisers in
various functional capacities.
Miss Augustine made reference to a 12-page Czechoslovak memorandus
which had recently been presented on the whole situation of Crechoslovakia,
past and present. She advised that lessrs. Caualy and Franak haid not signed:
the document and that NCIT's analysis of the memorandus had been unfavwable..
Ar. Vedeler interjected that should current negotiations fail.
some consideration should be given to allotting fimncial aid to both the
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_169.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY InfominTVIŲ
3. We are asking Mr. Lang to keep us posted on any future
plans that may develop to send any of these people to Portugal
so that we may advise the Department of State in advance of any
such projest.
DCPY/HOL¡ml.
Distributions
Addresses
->
Original and 1
DCPY
CIO
RI
LEGRET
H. Gates Lloyd

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_168.jpeg ---
14-00000
{
SECRET
SECURITY INFOONLATION
9 January 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR, KA. RESZÍT P. JOYCE
SUNJECT!
REFERENCE.
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
Radio Free Europe Operations
Kanorandum, dated 15 November 1951 from
T. H. E. Nesbitt to Robert Hooker
1. Regarding the project mentioned in the referenced memorandum
to transfer approximately 100 Polish exiles to Portugal for the
purpose of conducting rolish programs from that country, Mr. Robert B.
Lang, Director of Radio Free Europe, has advised us that on
He
3 January 1952, the Ecard of Directas of the National Committee
for a Free Hureps, Ins. decided that at least for the present
it would be afvisable to do all Polish programming in Munich.
stated that on Hr. C. D. Jackson's last trip to Portugal, the
authorities there advised him that. ary Polish axilas brought in
under the above-mentioned circumstances would have to live under
sonditions approximating "house arrest," since the Portugese
government would not tolerate their circulating freely within the
country.
2. Later Fr. Spencer Phenix stated that he and Mr. Gregory
Thomas believed that some few Poles could be brought in without
such drastic action by the Portugese authorities. He also expressed
concern that the short wave communications between Munich and Lisbon
were not 100% satisfactory for transmitting the Polish programs,
which are then relayed out of Lisbon to Poland. He felt that
programming in Portugal' would be the best way to handle the problem
but admitted that approximately 100 people would be needed, and,
under the circumstances, he agreed that it was better to keep the
entire program staff all in one place.
3. We are asking
}
$

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_171.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
5 January 1952
W-1761
Dear Abbott:
Thank you for reminding me that Ed McHale may soon
be available. As you say, I know him, though slightly,
but I have always heard excellent things about him.
I have made an attempt to find out who expressed
interest in him to Tom Myers but cannot do so. Perhaps,
therefore, you would pass this note on to Tom and ask him
to let me know sometime soon who expressed the interest.
That would help me ascertain whether we will want to try
to bring him down here.
My very best wishes to you for the New Year.
Sincerely,
Mr. Abbott Washburn
National Committee for a Free Europe
808
-
7th Avenue
New York, New York
PY-CIO:TWB: eh
Orig
-
Addressee
1 cc PY/Exec Asst.
1 cc
1 cc
2 cc
-
->
->
->
PY
CO✓
RI

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
- 2 -
followss
The officers of the National Information Bureau are as
Board of Directors
Allen Wardwoll, Honorary Chairman
Paul L. Foiss, Honorary President
Valentine E. Macy, Jr., President
Ralph H. Elanchard, Vico-President
Randall J. Loboeuf, Jr., Vice-President
Craig R. Smith, Secretary
Ellis Russell, Treasurer
Edward K. Bachman
Janes 0. Blaine
Mrs. Sidney C. Borg
Allen T. Burns
Harry M. Carey
Homer Folks
Maxwell Hahn
John M. Shaw
Mrs. John B. Hennoman
Edward J. Koyes
Hugh Knowlton
Alexander Lindey
Arch Mandol
Miss Adels W. Morrison
John B. Nivèn
D. Paul Roed, Executive Director
B. D. Burhoo, Research & Advisory
Mrs. E. R. Goodwin, Research & Advisory
Do you know any of them?
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
CIO: TWB: eh
Orig
-
Addressee (thru ADMC & DD/P)
1 cc - CIC
2 c
->>
RI
3 Attachments
1- NIP recommendation on Crusade.
2- Ltr from Earnes Mfg. Company.
3- NCFE meno on NI 2.
MERET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_172.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
i
=
i
i
I'
I
1. ""
-lea
~5 Jan 52
Card hesitate to express any
interest in this mans ("an operator"
"a friend of bel Harrison's's a
pelson
whom Card knew
on am Vets Com) until overall
"situation is settled. His interest,
Eu
any
case, is only mild.
No one else, so
else, so far
as
lean
determine, is interested.
Routine would be to
refer to
anel through
sonnel
and on Pasis
his report as to
it as to persound's
Suterest, let Mr. Washbur
know whether or not we
are trying. (There is clearly
no effort being made now
and the procedure. I see us
bound by could involve
considerable time and
unpredictable results.)
Mr. Millar feroon
But here is a draft, aver

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_170.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Ur NCFE Tike
SECURITY INFORMATION
SEGRET
In reply refer to: W-1766
8
January 9, 1952
i
Mr. Frederic R. Molbeare
350 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York-
Dear Freds
I am enclosing, for your confidential information, a
translation of a letter received by the Austrian Minister in
Washington, which has been brought to the attention of our
friends. In discussing this matter the Austrian Embassy
pointed out that Austria was an occupied country in which were
stationed, among others, Soviet troops and expressed the hope
that MCFE would refrain from taking any action which might
put Austria in an embarrassing position.
I am confident that we can count upon your cooperation
in preventing the development of any situation which would
embarrass the Austrian Government.
Sincerely,
Attachment 1
As stated above
00: Miss Viccellio
SECAET
Travis A. Albery
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_173.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
472-4
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn acress sheet
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
pg/Exa
DATE
TO
ROOM
NO
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
REC'D
Millard
"Braden
Bradew
7.
1220/REM
NO.
DATE
28
Tea
COMMENTS
1/2 TWB for action
advice a
i
to
you
on
present slant
- This kind
matters of
Card Meyer might
like to have him in
mind. I'd like to
write Abbat & say
we're toying.
10.
11.
12.
13.
FORM NO. 81-19
FEB 1990
1
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_174.jpeg ---
2.
14-00000
“
istrituration
:
i
I
December 19, 1951
Dear Tom:
As mentioned to you last Friday, our mutual friend Ed McHale
has done a good job here on the New York City Crusade
campaign in spite of numerous handicaps and obstacles.
The present clean-up operations will be completed next month,
and in view of the somewhat uncertain future of the Crusade
I have had a little talk with Ed so that he can be thinking
about moving to another assignment.
at the time Ed joined us, Tom Myers indicated that your shop
had expressed considerable interest in him. Would you be
good enough, Ton, to see whether such interest still exists
or whether there are any other plots that might be filled
by someone of his ability and forcefulness.
Many thanks.
Yours,
Abbott
=
}

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_177.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
- 2 -
cooperate with the HC7Z with a view to establishing means for control
of the contents of the newsletter.
6. To set up this project Mr. Kedivojevich would need a typo-
writer with Cyrillic letters, a hand press and a masthead for the
paper, which would represent a total investment of approximately
$193. He figures that he could then print his nemelotter twice a
month, about 400 copies of each edition, for a monthly amount of $180.
GRATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, S

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_179.jpeg ---
14-00000
THANOM:
PURJUCT:
ATC &
Robert J. Neare
SECRET
SECURITY INTE
26 June 1952
OPTRAL INTELLIONICE
;
1.
J. for
on 2 June 1952 you told me of your interview with Robert
and of his revence on his dismissal from NC75. Fr. Moɔra
van dimased from NC on security around and his dimis al was
initiated by this Agency.
2. absequently Moore interviewed Bill Portes in Nov York for a
job in the American Committee on United Furone but there sac none
iu
available. furing the course of this interview, Moure, though not
knowing Survee vas an employma of C, dimalged security infarcation
about -CI relationships, and our security people have been
notified of this fact.
CIO,TWB/Aka
Distribution:
orit.
1 cc
2 cc
* GC
- C
CIB
T/THIC
- Br
THOMAS V. N
Chief
International Organisations Division
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_176.jpeg ---
14-00000
30 June 1952
i
MEMORANDIB! FOR: CHIEF, INTURRATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
SUBJECT:
Preparation and Distribution of a Ecesletter in
the Derbian Language by lir, Lazer Radivojevich.
1. This of ice is interested in a project of facilitating
Mr. Lazar Radivojevich, a beneficiary of the CF, to prepare
(mimeograph) and distribute a small newsletter in the Serbian
language, among the former Sartian Officer prisoners of war, who
were detained in the camp at St. Johann 1 Pongan, in metria, of
which camp r. Radivojovich was the chief, elected by the members
of the camp.
About 300-400 members of this camp are now in the
United States, having emigratoi maior the provisions of the
Displaced Persons Act.
2. Aside from bolstering the morale of these peo:le and
assisting them to adjust themselves to their new surroundings,
the newslottor is calculated to make it possible for Mr. Radivojevich
to maintain contact with them so that this office may be in a posi-
tion to know their addresses and be informed of their whereabouts
at all times, For your information, this office believes that, under
certain circumstances in the future, this group or members of it
might be useful, and desires to see it maintain its ties through
Mr. Radivojevich.
over.
3. The newsletter would have no political character whatso-
It would contain social and personal news of interest to the
group; new arrivals of former colleagues; news of the thereabouts and
doings of members of the group; questions and answers for the emigra-
tion; something about the history and customs of the United States,
and such other itans as might help them orient and adjust themselves
in their now mirroundings.
40
The Deputy for JE/PC has presented this project to
Mfr. Campbell of the State Department and secured his approval.
5. to believe thi: project abould be implemented under the
sponsorship of the NCF.1 end, to this end, we re uest you to be
good mnough to take the matter up with them. This office will be glad to
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_178.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, 10/TOMIC
SUBJECT:
Stanislaus Oskiorka
26 June 1952
1. Walter Pforsholmer called me to say that a Congrosuman
with whom ho is in touch had asked whether we were taking on a
Mr. Stanislaus Oskierka. He was informed by the Congressman
that Tom Myers told him that there was no job for him in NCFE
but that ho might be able to get a job in CIA in Washington.
2. This is the kind of thing Myers shouldn't do, and I
think he should be called on it.
3. I find, incidentally, that Oskierka has not requested
employment through Myors to John Sields and I will tell
Mr. Pforzheimer that he should check with CIA Personnel.
CIO: THB/eh
Addressee
Orig
-
Mr. Pforzheimer
1 cc
->>>
1 cc - CIO
2 cc
-
KI
TWB
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
ons
:
SECRET
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_175.jpeg ---
14-00000
1 UNCLASSIFIED
☐
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
SUBJECT
10phonell
FROM
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
☐ SECRET
✓ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
10. (Office designation, room number, and
building)
1.
2.
FATTNISION
DATE
OFFICER S
INITIALS
HUMD
13 B
3.
2D:24
2. Boublin coluc 12 Mar
·S. Corbat
3.
0.
7.
8.
9.
06/EFR
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
FORM
3-87
RETURN TO CA-50
IP/ARD
Rab-OH-58
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
Daff
www
COMMENTS [Number or comment is show from whom
to whom Dige Tine arism column ofiar such comment)
PLEASE INITIAL AFTER REVIEWING
DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.
H
78-112.9
432343
748
Space #31539
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
FILE NO. which CIA AD 37
DOCUMENT:
FOLDER:
10
PAGE:
BOX:
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
3
z
UNCLASSIFIED
folder &
March 1952-June 1952
HCFE
17115
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
31.
SECRET
10 January 1952
MEMORAÐUR: FOR: DEPUTY DEJECTOR OF CENTRAL INIT:LLIGENCE
SUBJECT: National Information Bureau, Inc.
I
Varu' *
2-4902
1. Attached ore two surveys from the National
Information Bureau, Inc. The National Information
Bureau is a reputable investigation agency conducting
inquiries into American organizations which request
funds from the public. It advises donors on whother
the organizations are worthy of support.
2. The attachments contain the results of an
investigation into the Crusade for Freedom and the
American Committee for a United Europe. Note that the
Bureau's recommendation in respect to the Crusade is
adverse. The American Co nittee for a United Europe
on the other hand gets the Bureau's blessing.
Thomas Baden
THOMAS W. FLADEN
Chief
International Organizations Branch
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_180.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
!
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Complaint of Yugoslav Counselor
25 June 1952
1. Wally Barbour told me today that the Counselor of the
Yugoslav Embassy had called upon him to complain about the presence
of Yugoslav delegates at the NCFE Williamsburg Conference and the
signing of the Williamsburg statement by Yugoslav delegates.
2. Mr. Barbour said that the Counselor prefaced his remarks
with a statement that he knew Mr. Barbour would reply that he had
no influence over NCFE and no connection with it. Mr. Barbour said
that that was what he had said and that his statement was received
by the Counselor with a polite shrug.
3. Barbour did not seem unduly worried, but I told him that
we would shortly ask him for a review of State policy in respect
to the national councils and exiles with whom HCFE is dealing and
he said he would welcome the opportunity to make such a revisa.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chiaf
International Organizations Division
CIO: TWB/eh
Orig
– DDCI (thru ADFC & DD/P)
1 cc - EE -
Br.. (returned to C/10 9 July & destroyed, Intrated by Bross(Macomber
100 - TONI
Howley have seen Rin
100 -
CO
200 - H
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_184.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
TO: GEARING
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET
:
:
Regarding Sparling.
His debriefing for many reasons
should not be done here. Would appreciate your doing with
object of getting as complete a story as possible but with
special attention tos
1
1. Method of programming, control exercised in Munich
and control of Munich by New York in as detailed form
as possible.
2. What emigre groups are favored if any.
3. What relations are with our people, British and
Germans.
4. What is set-up of news gathering?
5. What security procedures are followed in Munich.
6. What has been or is being done to determine
effectiveness of programs from all angles (1)
technical, (2) content, (3) audience reaction, eto.
SECRET
:
|

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_182.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
•
for
5. It is requested that HCFE be informed that the discussions were
not carried out in accordance with the original plan nor with the agroament
between CIA and NCFB. It is further requested that the following action
be taken by NCFE to rectify actions taken so farı
A. That CIA be informed prior to, not after the event, when
substitutions, changes, or additions are made to the accepted plans.
b. That NCFE inform us promptly of action taken in connection
with this current plan.
C. That NCFB arrange, as soon as possible, to meet with Pope,
Rianu and Crihan.
d. That NCFE forestall formal meetings, outlined in paragraph
2 above, between the members of the New York group.
That NCFE sond letters to the following National Peasants,
Pops, Planu, Crihan, Chilezen, S. Kanuila, Rautu, bunescu, Fotosand and
Radovan indicating that a general meeting of the National Peasants will
be hald in the near future to discuss party responsibility in forming an
emigro orgardsation. The NCFE officer conducting the meeting should to
briefed on the SE Division Plan by an officer of this division,
GRATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, SE

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_181.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
1672-▼
SECURITY IN..
24 June 1952
MEMORANDUM CR, Chief, 10 Division
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Current NCFE Discussions with Rummim National
Peasant Party Members
Hemorandum to Chief, IO Division, Subject: SE Division
Plan for Rumanian Emigre Organisation, dated 28 May 1952
1. In a telerhone conversation with Mr. Prichett on 23 June,
Mr. Dolbeare informed us that the NCFE discussions with members of the
Rumanian National Feasant Party had been held with the migres by pairs
rather than in a group as planned. On Wednesday, June 18, Altschule held
meetings as followss
Rautu and Bunescu
Botosani and Radovan
Ghilezan and Venetu (did not attend)
2. A meeting is scheduled for this week with Popa and Biamu. Meetings
between Chilezan and Rautu and between Fotosani and Venetu have been arranged.
3. According to Mr. Dolbeare, the National Peasants have been asked
by #CFB to formulate a plan for a new committee. Mr. Dolbeare did not
indicate whether NCFE suggested the form outlined in the SE Division Alan.
4. The arrangements for the discussions with the National Peasants
differ, as follows, from those agreed on by CIA and Mr. Leich in the dis-
cussion of the implementation of the SE Planı
8. A general meeting of the National Peasants, listed in para-
graph 3 b of the Plan, was suggested in the Plan. The general meeting was
requested for the specific purpose of bringing National Feasants of both
groups together and emphasizing party unity.
b. It appears that neither Crihan nor Mamuila has been included
in the discussions.
1
The addition of Rautu to the discussions is not opposed,
however the addition of Vanstu is.
:
"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_185.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
TU
.
.
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED
L.IDENTIAL
(SANDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
MR. BRADEN
SECRET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
20/73/
--
INITIALS
DATE
MR. EARYAN
19446
-
FROM
INITIALS
--
DEPUTY DIRECTOR AND
DATE
6/17/52
"
☐ ☐
"
APPROVAL
☐ INFORMATION
ACTION
COMMENT
DIRECT REPLY
CONCURRENCE
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
FILE
REMARKS: DDCI has asked to see copy of the paper
we have for use in the event something of this
nature happens.
JSE
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
FORM 30-4
SEP. 1647
2-9306
UNCLASSIFIED
16-67704-1 D. OVERNMENT PRINTING OPPICE
|

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_183.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
}
i
i
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRE
23 June 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, WE
+
SUBJECT:
i
Debriefing of Harry Sperling by
L. de Neufville
1. L. de Neufville recently cabled that H. Sperling, who
is to be relieved as Chief of RFE information gathering in
Munich, waa talking freely of his removal and making comments
about his replacement.
2. De Neufville suggested that Sparling be sent back to
Washington for a debriefing. For many reasons, including our
relations with NCFE, we would prefer it to be done in the field.
3. I therefore suggest that de Neufville be allowed to do
this for us and would appreciate your approval of my sending him
the attached message.
homas
W. Bundan
THUMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Attachment 1
As stated above.
SECHI

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_186.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
SECURITY IN⠀⠀ ***
INNE
1
Excnal. 7 Regist
-3-0322
I
21 June 1952
KINMORANDUM POR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Proposed Statement on SCFE
1. Here is my proposal for the final draft of the NCPE
emergency statement. It is the result of changes suggested in
my own second draft by Frank winner, yourself and Spencer Phenix.
2. Note that not all of the changes suggested by you have
been adopted. All changes were considered by kiɛner, Phenix and
myself, and I would be glad to tell you the comments that were
made and the reasons why we felt the attachment should be approved.
4 Attachments
Final statement and
Drafte 3, 4 85
CIO: TWB/ch
Orig
– Addresses
100 - DD/P (thru ADPC)
1 co - 10/DMC
CIO
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SELE
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_188.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1
:
:
!
:
operations of the Committee. The work of the Committee is carried
forward under the direction of its President, Rear Adrdral Harold B.
Miller, UN Retired, who is on leave of absence from the American
Petroleum Institute. On March 1, 1952, he succeeded Mr. C. D. Jackson,
who has returned to resume his position with TIME-LIFE, Inc.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_187.jpeg ---
14-00000
PROPOSED STATIMENT
The National Committee for a Free Europe is an organization of
private American citizens whose purpose is to encourage the spread
of freedom behind the Iron Curtain in Europe. It is a manbership
corporation, chartered under the laws of the State of New York.
In spreading the doctrine of freedom and combatting Soviet
totalitarianism, the Committee operates radio stations which piores
the Iron Curtain; in close cooperation with the French authorities
and the University of Strasbourg, it operates an educational centre
at Strasbourg for young men and women who have escaped from behind
the Iron Curtain; it attempts by other means than radio to carry
messages of hope and of the possibility of eventual liberation to
the nations which are now enslaved; it conducts studies of the lave,
customs and cultures of these nations as they existed prior to
Soviet occupation; and it documents the changes which have been
imposed by the Soviet so that if the time should come when the
people rise against their conquerors, they may more easily estab-
lish continuity with their past.
In all of this work the Committee draws information and support
from many sources -- from those who have escaped and who must remain
anonymous for fear of reprisals on their families at home, from those
in this country who wish to work voluntarily for the cause of freedom
abroad, from the American people at large, and from government agen-
cles which, in the American tradition, give all possible aid to
private citizens engaged in a worthwhile public cause.
Fund raising for the Committee is done by a subsidiary, the
Crusade for Freedom which, in the course of raising money, also
helps to keep before the American people and people throughout the
world the need for spreading the idea of freedom. For example, the
Freedom Bell, which now rings regularly over the city of Berlin, was
the gift of sixteen million Americans who contributed to the Crusade
for Freedom. All in all, signatures and voluntary donations from
more than twenty-five million Americans have come to the Crusade for
Freedom to date. Generous contributions have also been made to the
Committee by private foundations; and at the request of Government
agencies, certain specific research and other projects have been
undertaken and carried on with the assistance of funds provided by
the departments or agencies concerned.
A Board of Directors consisting of prominent American citizens
from all walks of life pass upon the policies and supervise the

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_189.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
-
S. .rity information
(Attachment)
CONFIDENTIAL
MEMORANDUM
TO:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
June 25, 1952
Mr. Braden
Jesse Macki
MacKnight
Ne Knigh
1952 Crusade for Freedom
Please see that the attached memo
gets to Kr. Walsh through secure channels.
Attachments
Memo to Hakh from
Macknight età. 6/23/52
Copy of this Mamo for
Mr. Braden
11

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_190.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
=
COFALENTIAL
-
Security Information
MELLORAR LEA
TO:
PlQ2.
SUBJECT:
Kr. Richard alsh
Jeece. canight
M.
gu
1952 Crusade for Freedom
June 25, 1953
Your
emerendum of June 21 has been reviewed and the
following comments represent a consensus of our opiniont
1.
3.
Here ons - The Lalloon idea as a fund raising
sice i catisfactory, provided substantial
emphasic in alco giver to the use of and
other vehicles as letrees of Lelivering the
behind the Iron Curtain.
C - The idea of a message bused on the
Cristal theme is satisfactory subject to agree-
ent on the precise text.
-
3. Hase Three Subject to review, in light of any
Nature developments in Europe whion might affect
the tentative decision, there is agreement on the
use of a tall number talloons as a syruolic
operation.
Lo
Hase Four - The gift idea as part of a balloon
project is considered undesirable.
Cal - Security Information
AQUAS

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_191.jpeg ---
14-00000
the A
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
i
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Mr. Braden, PY/IO
Radio Free Europe
17 June 1952
1. For your information the following report on Radio Free Europe
Hungarian broadcasts was received here recently, although the informa-
tion was obtained last March:
#a. Radio Free Europe broadcasts from MUNICH, Germany,
are more popular than the Voice of America programs and its
news coverage is considered both current and based on authen-
tic sources. However, its commentaries on foreign politics
are severely criticised and allegedly the general opinion in
Hungary is that whoever writes this program has not the
slightest idea either of the conditions in Hungary or of the
general needs of the people.
"b. There are also objections to the program of News
Briefs (ROVAT ADASOK). This program is considered a nuisance
and isn't even listened to by those for whom it is intended,
By scheduling 15 and 30 minute programs specifically beamed
to different segments of the population, such as: the women's
program, the church program, the farmer's program, book and
movie reviews, etc., Radio Free Europe reduces its listening
audience to those who might be interested in the specific
program, while the majority of the listeners are forced either
to cease listening to their radios or change to another broad-
casting station. As a result, Radio Free Europe has been losing
its audience and the decline is especially noticeable during
the program of News Briefs when the majority of the listeners
allegedly change over to the BBC program.
*c. The workers are particularly interested in political
news and are in an excellent position to spread the news
throughout the factories. Again the BRC appears to be the
most popular station. Informant learned of the fate of one
Imre HORVATH, a group leader in a Textile Mill in SZEGED.
HORVATH passed on some news concerning the activities of the
"Political Police" of SZEGED which he had originally heard
on one of these foreign broadcasts. This resulted in HORVATH
being immediately transferred to DUNAPENTELE and his "group"
was disbanded.
1
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
]
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_192.jpeg ---
+
14-00000
}
GRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
-2-
"
1
:
"d. The necessity for special programs beamed at the
youth of Hungary is very acute. The youth of today which
has passed its 16th year of age does not lister to children's
programs any longer but in interested in broadcasts on the
subject of anti-Communist ideologies. This is the ngo group
that the Communists are especially interested in and on whose
education in the Communist spirit special omphasis is placed.
All of this age group, without exception, attends Communist
Party schools and Marxist seminars and also receives pro-
military training. To aid in this thorough indoctrination
in Marxism 3a-presented to them, special newspapors and
magazines full of Communist ideological natorial are being
published. It is therefore highly desirable that special
programs aimed at this youth group be prepared so that they
will be able to judge for themselves the true conditions in
comparison to the propaganda that is fed to them by the
Communist regime of Hungary."
2. The comment of the field accompanying this report states:
"An effort is being made to ascertain the basis of the above critique
of foreign radio broadcasts by asking Informant if this critique repre-
sents his own opinions or the opinions of one or more friends or casual
contacts, and whether it is an observation of the programs which were
heard during his short visit in BUDAPEST or based on a longer period of
time. Inasmuch as Informant cannot be contacted directly, we have no
assurance that this information will be forthcoming in the near future,
and it is deemed best to submit the above critique as is, for the time
beings"
1
EE/PC/R/GI/rwp
Distribution:
1,2 - Addressee
3,4
-
• EE/PC/H
5,6
-
RI/FI
GEORGE WEIST
Sent to n. y. 26 June 195~
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
NATIONAL INFORMATION BUREAU, Inc.
IMPORTANT
This report is a privileged communication and is strictly for the confidential information of the
person or organization to whom it is addressed.
AMERICAN COMMITTEE ON UNITED EUROPE, INC.
537 Fifth Avenue
New York 17, New York
April 27, 1951
ORIGIN AND PUMPOSE: American Committee on United Purope, Inc. was incorporated in Now
York, Fekšuary 16, 1949. Stated puronse of the Committen la two-folds
In Europe to #1. encourage the idea of unity and lend assurance that a
unified Europe will have the support and friendship of the people of the
United States; 2. give desporately needed financial support to groups
such as the European Movement - working in Furope on behalf of unity."
-
In America to "1. give Americans a better understanding of the steps to-
ward_unity which Europe has already undertaken; 2. encourage civic, edu-
cational and other groups to study their implicstions and the moans by
which American policy can further the works and finally, 2. as specific
issues arise, the Committer will point out what we Americans can do, an
individuals and as a nation, to help Furope unito and thus to help themselves."
By way of background information, the Committee stated in its early daysı
"Despite Europe's recuperation from the visible effects of wartime de-
vastation, »ntiquated national barriers to unity and progress still in-
vite disaster for all countries. A continent divided into seventeen se-
parate, conflicting poll_tical and economic pockets presents a weak and
vulnerable flank, perilous to world perce and security.
*Four decades of bloodshed and economic deterioration have taught the peoples
of Europe that survival is impossible without unity. As never before, they
have bonded together statermen, trade unionists, business leaders, church-
mon and educators in a dosen nations - in the movement for European unity.
Although determined to accomplish Union, they face many obstacles.
-
"Convinced of our stake in the success of their work, the American Committee
on United Europe believes th American suport and encouragement can be
decisively helpful to the realization of this objective. Leaders in Europe
have confirmed this belief, and insist that the time for maximum effort is
at hand.
PROGRAM AND ACTIVITIES: The American Committee on United Europe describes itself as "in
thorough agreement with Winston Churchill's assertion that 'We must spread the knowledge
that this thin, is really possible...We must creste a clim te of opinion.'” It will also
*seek to avoid pleading for any single preconceived scheme or precies pattern for
Puropean Union, conscious that the nature of Union must evolve from the needs and aspira-
tions of the peoples who will unite.”

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_193.jpeg ---
14-00000
SAY IN
MPHORANDUM FOR: KR. MART |
HR. MANET 1. JOYCE
SUBJECT:
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
Vespasion V. Fella
a
A
Ritum 5
Exiel
17 June 1952
1. With reference to your note of 2 June transmitting
various papers regarding the employment of Vespasian V. Folla
try the Mid-Furopean Studies Conter, this matter was taken up
sith Admiral Miller on 13 June.
2. I agreo with Mr. Campbell that Dr. Pella has recoived
unfair treatment by the Fund and that if it was not the intention
of the kid-European Studies Omter to provide remuneration for
his services, no promises to him ahould have been made in the
first place. We have asked the Fund to reconsider its decision
and to try to make some arrangements for employing him.
3. No are awaiting an answer from the Fund and shall inform
you of its decision.
IO/TOMIC: ES/ch
Distributions
Orig & 1 = Addressee (thru ADPC)
100
2 ca
2.00
-
- Co
-
CO
IO/DHIC
RI
THOMAS W. BRADEN

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_194.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
10 June
BILL:
My opinion on this matter is the same as
Campbell's: that Polla has not gotten a
square deal from NCFE.
Have talked to Mary Newsom (kad acting chief
of Rumanian deak, PC) on this and she 1) agrees
that Pella should get renumeration for his
work and 2) thinks that his background is O.K.
Also talked to Wilson Pritchett. He doesn't
want to pive an o.k. on this, unless and until
a name check has been done.
Question: Do we meet the "suspense" and get
a name check or do we go ahead. I'd be in
favor of the latter---and of informing
afterwards.
Hasa
a nome
"check!!
1950
:
:
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_195.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across sheet
and each comment numbered to correisand with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
Io(Tonic
NO.
DATE
DATE
TO
ROOM
NG
REC 5
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
C/TO
JUB
COMMENTS
6.
7.
3
Tonic to 1
walsh is preparing Iloper of
paper detailing complete
plans of san paiger.
me
Kright will pass
one around thereed was
Concone the other at
some time.
as Conference 3 in deest.
no falloon operetitions
possible but indicated
question of whether unpubl
Could be told balloons it
would be med to deliver
the message could ha
Considered separated.
with
I will confer
McKnight Thesda on
ther. Plan as a whole
Allin et bille.
much
belle. the
Ford th
ip
ciation
10.
11.
12.
FORM NO. 81-18
FCB 1930
SECRET
Walsh is also treint
this with litaflast
day - "Peasing het to
Amport.
Sprole
midler
20%
"T.
Mak
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_198.jpeg ---
14-00000
J
-3-
-
these messages of friendship and hope for the peoples behind the Iron Curtain.
By thus taking the offensive and putting the Communists on notice that this
is a great expression of wanimity on the part of the American people
any attempt on the part of the Communists to deprecate or interfere with
the program would lend itself to psychological warfare use. This coincides
with General Clay's statement in his letter of February 14th to the various .
state chairmen.
We are not underestimating the magnitude of such an operation here or abroad.
To gain the maximum psychological benefit, at least 100,000 balloons should
be used. It could be a hard-hitting demonstration of the effectiveness of
the Crusade for Freedom.
Every member of the Crusade staff, including the field organization, hɔpes
that this idea may be approved. Seeing the balloons in their home toms and
knowing that their messages could reach the peoples behind the Iron Curtain
should inspire millions of Americans to support the campaign financially and
would serve to remind them constantly throughout the campaign of the tre-
mendous accomplishments achieved during the last two years as a result of
their personal contributions.
It is most important that we secure positive and unalterable clearance of
this idea within the next ten days.
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_197.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-
- 2
-
I
"Ic have come up with another idea which we feel would lend itself to the
greatest possible psychological warfare usage. It would also enable us to
coordinato our campaign wit the objectives and program of the Voice of
America.
Tying in the previous accomplishments of the Crusade, namely, facilities
for Radio Free Europe, the Freedom Bell and the balloon operation, we feel
that we could distribute through our state and local organizations millions
of thin paper lcaflots, such as those used in the Winds of Freedom operation.
Thezo would carry a message based on the Christmas theme of peace on earth,
good will to men; the Freedom bell would be printed at the top, and beneath
the foreign language messages would be space at the bottom for personal
signatures and addresses. And the si:matures would be promoted throughout
the country on the basis that these messages of good will would be flown
in balloons behind the Iron Curtain during the Christmas season. The basic
approach to the American people would be that their contributions to this
year's campaign would not only go to purchase balloons that would carry
their personal message behind the Iron Curtain (we now have stored in Munich
55,000 unmarked P-20 balloons and 5,000 balloons marked "Wolnese"), but
would also go to improve and increase the facilitics of Radio Free Europe
and Radio Free Asia.
The focal point of this campaign would be a balloon itself. " have 20,000
P-20 balloons in Minneapolis. Those balloons could be distributed through
state chairmen to cities and toms where they could be inflated and placed
in front of city hall or public square. Beneath the balloons, receptacles
would be placed where both the leaflets and contributions could be collected.
For example, cach city committee could letter its balloon to read "From the
Citizens of Peoria, Illinois, U.S.A."
Actually, none of these balloons would be shipped to Europe, but the leaflete
could be air-mailed to New York on December 15th and be forwarded to Munich
to arrive before Christmas Day.
Another possibility to be considered is the "gift" from American people idea.
We now have in Munich 100,000 razor blades, 75,000 needles, 150,000 cakes of
soap and 100,000 zippers. These might be included in the balloons. I think
this idea has much to commend it. For one thing, this would give something
besides words to the peoples behind the Iron Curtain who are likely to ret
fed up on too many messages which tell then to keep their chins up. Secondly,
it provides an excellent way of countering Red propaganda against the balloo
operation: Radio Free Europe will then be able to ask, "Don't your masters
want you to receive gifts? Don't they want you to ask why it is so difficult
to get razor blades in your country and why the free world has enough of
then that it can send them to you?”
I presume that the question will be raised as to what the Communists would
do with advance knowledge of the operation. I feel that the answer to this
lics in the joint operation of both RFE and VOA, continually reporting; during
the month of the Crusade of the great drive throughout Amurion to secure

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
NATIONAL INFORMATION BUREAU, Inc.
IMPORTANT
This report is a privileged communication and is strictly for the confidential information of the
person or organization to whom it is addressed.
-2-
AMERICAN COMMITTEE ON UNITED FUROPE, INC.
April 27, 1951
.
Grants have been wide to private croups in Europe working for European union. Groups
have been selected wich have, in the opinion of the Americer. Committee on Onited
Europe, concret grups for (1) strengthenin, the Council of Furope as a political
authority; (2) au:porting besic aim of the Maracall Plan and the Military Aid Progrea
within the Atlantic Pact; (3) inclusion of Vestern Germany in a unified Europe.
The major group receiving Committee sup; ort i The Furopeen Movement, an overall or-
ganisation composed of rix organizations of private citizens in Europe, which claims to
have helped influence the govermeath of Western Europe to establish the Council of
Furope in 1949. European Movement has initiated conferences and research on economic,
cultural and legal quertions tearing on union.
In the United State: the Committee has published at: tements on Europeen union by European
leaders, Newsletter with a circulation of some 2,500 copire, summaries of proceedings
at meetings of various European groups, and public opinion, olls.
The Committee also sponsored lecture tours by Paul Reynaud, Lord Loyton, Sir Harold Buttes
and Paul-Henri Speak and single lectures by Winston Churchill, Robert Schuman und Paul
Van Zeeland.
The Current program is as followss
Continued fund-raising for support of Furopean groups, particular y the
European Movement as a center of work in Purope for & Union.
Publication and distribution of addresses, studies and reports, and
sponsorship of meetings at which European statesmen may give Americans
a first hand account of the work abroad.
PERSONNEL: The officent and Board of Directors include the following: Chairman, #William
J. Donovan; Vice Chairman, #Allen W. Dullet; Secretary, "George S. Frenalin, Jr.; Treasurer,
Emmett F. Connely; Executive Director, William P. Durkee;
Raymond B. Allen
Charles 6. Cheston
Lucius D. Clay
1. F. Connely
B. P. Gunnsky
*David Dubinsky
*Arthur J. Goldberg
A. Crawford Greene
#Charles R. Hook
David F. Lilienthal
Herbert C. Little
Kobert S. Maguire
*Walter N. Maguire
Stacy May
*George Nebolsine
* Members of Executive Committes
Carl T. Nixon
*Frederick Jabora
Kurt F. Pantzer
* Robert P. Patterson
Walter Bedell Smith
#Arnold J. Zurcher

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_196.jpeg ---
14-00000
Fill. How dir
You
cave
June 13, 19th this matter?
i
1
1
Nemo to:
Admiral Hiller
From:
Subject:
Richard Walsh
Crusade for Freedon Campaign
I have studied very carefully the plan for the fund raising carpaign this
fall submitted by Fred Smith, A series of discussions have been held with
the staff of Crusade for Freedom, and the following conclusions are the
consensus of all who have studied the proposed progren.
First, it is fult that because of the nation-wide acceptance of the Crusadu
and its recognized success during the past two years it would be a mistake
to substitute the "Dimus for Preedom" slogan for Crusade for Freed: 1. Tho
Advertising Council concure with us in our reluctance to use the word "Dimes"
for several substantial reason. Foremost among them is the fact that our
drive for funds will and on December 15th, and the arch of Dias, which
the Advertising; Council will als asist on, will start about January 1st.
Another important factor to be considered is the difficulty of selling a
new slogan, such as Dimes for Freedon, to a public which has already con-
tributed $3,500,000 to support Crusade for Freedom, Freedom Bell, Winds of
Freedom, Radio Free Europe and Radio Free Asia.
The Dines for Freedom proran not only loses the effect of the last two
campaigns which gave acceptance to the name Crusade for Freedom, but also
takes no apparent thought of the future of the organization. What happens.
in 1953? Do we start from scratch again with some completely nat promotional
idua? By changing emphasis every year we build up no continuing and in-
creasing acceptance of the Crusaic for Freedom.
Another danger inherent in the plan is the drive for 40,000,000 signatures.
Even with the Freudom Train and Procden Bull, which people could see, huar,
touch and ring, 16,000,000 gigatures were obtained. It is highly improbable
that my could secure 40,000,000 signatures with nothing more tangible than
the "he don't like Communism" statement.
Except for the Dimes for Freedom slogan and the usual outline of state and
local organizations, the plan itself does not lend itself to execution.
Perhaps the most difficult speration would be that of the tricks with tho
proposed huge scrolls. Their cross-country trck would be extremely hard to
operate and coordinate. The other would cause great difficultics, per-
ticularly crossing the northern drest. We could not depend on any truck
holding to a schedule across the Dakotes, Nebraska, or half a dozen other
states hiring the blizzard seasən,
Another factor to be considered is that every tom in the country would not
'be vizited.
The idea of having the trucks converge on Washington is one which I think
should be given a great deal of consideration. I have no doubt but that
the Department of State and specifically the Voice of America tould protust
vigorously to any approach that might be made to Congress.
:
1
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_199.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECKET
SECURITY INFORMATION
12 June 1952
KARDANIAM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
QUBJECTS
NCFE-CFA
1. I am attaching two memoranda having to do with NCFE on
which it is unnecessary for you to take action. They point never-
theless to the inevitable difficulties we have in dealing with large
and necessarily somewhat autonomous organisations such as CFZ and
CPA. He are, as you know, charged by directive with exercising
control over these organizations, and the memoranda indicate that
maintaining this control is a difficult day-to-day job requiring
considerable tact and determination as well as efficiency and a
high spirit of cooperation. In both HCFE and CFA there is a pride
in independence which ought to be encouraged, but there is also a
cense of irritation with having to inform anyone in Washington about
anytining and the tendancy to regard anyone below the level of General
Sed ta and yourself (and idth NCFE, Mr. Wisner) as in the way.
era.
2. with NCFF, this irritation probably goes back to another
As I read the history, the operation at that time was a back-
stopping operation pure and simple, and I think it was not an
efficient one; certainly it had no respect in New York. He have
worked hard to resolve past tangles, to make our relationships
orderly and clean, and eventually to move to the point at which it
may be possible to do more than backstop. I do not mean that we
have my impression that it is possible to run these large organd sa-
tions from »ashington, but I have had in mind to build the kind of
Division and to get the kind of people who would of their own
abilities and efficiency be respected in a manner which would enable
them to give guidance and real help in the field of ideas and policy
coordination.
3. be now have Bill Durkee, Emmons Brown and Cord Meyer as
Branch Chiefs in 10 and we are getting some very good people to
work with them. I think we are well equipped to handle the diffi-
culties. Kich the memoranda indicate, providing we have firm backing
from the hill. The necessity of getting this backing leads me to
ask you to review here the recent Valentine incident.
SECRET
-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
F
.1.38
B
14
2.
957
It
UNCH
CONVERTAtion at the partment of case on 21arch 152.
Prezent were 1.628ry. 20yc.) Frander
Fritzsan and souice from
State and aloner, Lloyd and ran from th.
1
Mr. Frelment returned fra
and Bald
What he had tires sweats to make about ^, 15 order Quy wore
as follow:
and others
1. No net in the frock Labace,
complained of te activities on the stringers et 64. luese
utriver.
4
anettie9900 #2
wint to castles 2 other countries
:
#31367
ui inut clearing du tho 7.1. Haos).
Joke straat and told
times that the
revorters must
1
Waterloynes and
bove with refurees
i wint r. blancr
:veral
in
e tail tant ne
un-ld repeat the word that we vand of V.A
were identical of LA mule... ist are discusion TVAR
Uist of the
and it -
☑
ST.
GPG
roblem, if not b
5268
Landow. kl
OSTO 26 117
Prin
W
al now i
7814
und tolved for
aver
"
2
2. Primal 6 26
around rupena:
'
within Br ais.
1 manner in w
Pr. Ante
over, instructe
ain to barn
tint
LP 15.2.
3.
and and to
Fuidanes, 3L
i
272
T
31.
would be for
I
Lister
☐ a 50 tr
-
27
1721008
715-2
.
wt.
2013
sources
Es and rascita
sur security.
A to
1 ■ outlined t
2.I. '
w instr
unico, cra¬
to infiltraw
C
-
tomi to co
mát
ZOC.,
13".
Arian
566.
virtas >
-->
...
2 Mism
cal.
.
1417
•
2 ur ri.e. to
54±
W
.
-
(..
TOTT
↑ zet dit. Harry (6)
winter (1
..

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_201.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
}
'.
1
:
10 June 1952
MENTORANDUM FOR: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COOPTINATION
ATTENTION,
Mr. Rick Deane
Operations Divia on
SUBJECT:
MB 50 Transmitters
1.
"
This is to confirm our conversation to the effect
that both TEILLAR and TITONIC are interested in the MB 50
mobile transmitting ipment. Both feel that they can
use that equipment profitably in their radio operation.
be shall need a little time to reach a judgment as to which
of these projects should receive the equipment and to
determine its best utilisation,
2. We should like to request that this equipment te
transferred to the 10 Division for later determination as
to whether it may best be utilized by PTFILLAR or IPTONIC,
3. It is our understanding that this will be transferred
to us without reimbursement ard that this will not involve
the 10 Division in the so-called M 50 project which has
been discussed at length with kr. Lindsey and others of your
staff.
10/EBB:blj
Distribution
Orig
-
->>>
Addressee
IO/ExO
1-
CIO
2 - RI
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_200.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
--
:
į
•
4. On 10 June, Alan Valentine remarked to Emmons Brown that
you had agreed that I should be rebuked for my letter to him of
22 May. This was an unsolicited comment from Valentine, and · Brown
made no reply.
5. I have gone over the record of letters to and from Valentine
since he assumed his duties and I have also carefully gone over the
record of all the activities which CFA has undertaken on which liaison,
backstopping and policy guidance from us were involved, and I find to
my own satisfaction that we have done an effective job for Valentine.
I find memoranda and records indicating that I have on several occa-
sions, as in the letter to which he referred, asked for his comment
and criticism and assured him that my sole purpose was to be helpful
to him in doing his job. I would be glad to go over these records
with you. Despite this, however, Valentine has told me that neither
Brown nor I are high level enough for him to talk to and that in the
future he will get his policy guidance directly from you or from
General Smith.
6. At my express suggestion Valentine began writing letters to
you. I realised that he was a difficult person and I knew that writing
to you and receiving letters from you would give him the sense of
importance that he wanted. When he wrote you,
When he wrote you, however, to protest my
appointment of Emmons Brown as Executive Officer of the 10 Division
and to suggest to you personnel arrangements in 10 that should, in
the first instance at least, and in any spirit of friendly cooperation
have been made to me, it seemed to me that I ought to be fairly firm.
I do not think my letter in reply was in error. Even if it was, I
think you should have backed me up on it. If I make mistakes, you
can fire me. Until you do fire me, you ought to back me. As matters
now stand, you have put me in a position where, in dealing with the
altuation I have tried to outline above, I shall have greater diffi-
culty than before.
7. I have thought about all of this carefully and feel it right
to tell you that I think you let me down.
I
:
"
2 Attachments
2 Mamos for the Record
dtd 12 June 1952.
COTTYB/Ch
Orig - Addressee
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
ZONE C
1 cc - ☑O
SECRET
+
i
{
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_205.jpeg ---
14-0000
:
The RJ Copy of TOP SECRET
document 63466
dated. Len
dated. 250841952
which was removed from this
file, is filed in the RI
TOP SECRET CONTROL SECTION
1305 "L" Bldg.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_204.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
his standards of efficiency; he had made several changes in the
Crusade and was about to make moro; he had himself employed people
whom he rogarded as expert who were responsible to him to give him
advice on the Crusade problem and ho simply could not tolerate a
system of inspection which was not responsible to him; if we had
any lack of confidence in him as an officient manager, he would be
glad to return to his former employment immediately.
5. Wo discussed the whole problem in friendly terms for some
ten minutes and it was apparent that nothing I could say would alter
his position. I therefore-ceased to press him.
6. May I have a decision as to whether higher authority wishes
to take this up with Admiral Miller or whether the PRC wishes to
strike its instructions to mo.
i
CIO: TWB/sh
Orig
->
->
Addressce (thru ADPC)
IO/TONIC
1 cc
1 cc CIO
2 cc - RI
1 cc
->
PRC file
Tamas
Buaden
THOMAS W. ERADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_202.jpeg ---
14-00000
B
!
SECRET
STORMITY INFORMATION
Executive Rog stry
2-9832
ME ORANDUM FOR:
DAFUTY DIRECTOR (FLANS)
SUBJECT:
b
5 June 1952
Truman Speech to American Action Committco
Against Mass Deportations in Romania
1. May I urge you to road the attached commentary by TWE
on President Truman's statement the other day to the itomanian
exiles, which was the subject of considerable concern to RFE and
to VOA:
2.
Please note the manner in which RFE handled thiɛ job.
The President spoke words which RFE has for months urged that
it be allowed to speak. Because the President had departed from
his text, it was not possible to give RT any guidance to say
they should play the President's words strongly or that they
should play then down. The State Department at first gave orders
to the Voice to play the speech up, and only later was this
countermanded. Meantime, however, RE, acting without guidance
from us, broadcast the attached which I think night woll be shown
to Mr. Joyce and others in State as an example of RFE responsibility
and judgment.
Attachment
CIO: TWB/eh
Orig
-
Addressee (thru ADFC)
1 cc
-
->>
1 cc
2 cc -
IO/TONIC
CIO
RI
W. Braden.
THOMAS W. BRADE!
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_207.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
1
1
1
:
.
-2-
present the
French: Coverment is orgundadar; a special effec fit in the
båndstay of feed in Affaire to not a. a sort of Janarel Con-
sulate for both the ull port and a repart of
Run.
1. miles (and orandan h2o, dated April 27, 1952),
indicate that this office will remain all, and the actual
rehabilitation and costular torr old turned over to a
non-govermental agency. I-III's contact with the French
Comittee and Dr. Osby's report beth indicate that the Prunch
Comittee is to be chosen to ha alle tis problem. obvicusly,
in the face of developing; French policy, and the particular sit-
uation now existing in France, it would be unwise for if to
encourage HOT to compete an uplicate a function which the
Franch Coverment ha realy carnarled for an indigolaus or
isation, Hoover, in view of the present position of HOA, in
France, and its far-reachininence three bout the oire
field, it is believal that I should contimu its activities
in emigre affairs in France thred its recent rario office,
and should extend the to include se li ovet financial
support to the French Committee to be used along the lines
sugested in the Bull Report.
3. WE-III believes that interests can best be served through CPC
cover support of the French Committee. By imprly devolodng the present
initial covert contacts with the French couitue, it is believed that (re
can maintain effective operatin rolationclips with the can itics, ami
insure that its action and clicis ill conform to our objectives and be
pre, orly co-ordinated with those of
Thus PC would lock to ort
control over ad rc reips and activities in France, without eperdy inter-
fering in french demistic affairs.
'
4. For the reasons stated above, 7-11 ruiterates its position as
outlined in a Lorand in for at (datel tay 1902) vào vai tech ans,
arroved by the bid, and in vidch it was cocheraled
by rʊ-
uncle for covertly uit aportin endre activitie in
Franca, tentatively using at prosent the French Comittee for me tunjo.
WE-III/FC/G B/pl
Distribution:
Crit
722
-
Addressee
15-111
- ADFC
- WE-Chrono
FI Analysis
- G.
11011
CHAVE
11-IC

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_206.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Security information
2 June 1952
C
APATA MTATION
777
in
JUST Neactions of
cactions of neocals cutim the
ull Report.
10 of 27 January 1952 (The il port)
10 from C/10 cat d 16 April 1952
1.
T-III consider that the repetale race by the bull Expert
should resolve invera le contideration by 0. Rehabilitation work
and the sci-consular activition of the various Refugee Committees
are a highly instruentel manu of cuba tin; Communist
anon eftillitioned din race, and will help give unity to
the various on re prin France.
2. However, I-III does not believe that this work the ad be
undertaken by an overt Arican cronication. The followin are the
reasɩng for W-II1's position:
(a) The French public as a wal, already boudly act
"Americanc in Trance", would room tide un coscary intr-
ference in French dratic affaire by an Awrican organisation
Via
·
.
(b) then a large orlean organization, Die at 1.
undertale such work,
uni ulirway, of Interior
and the french cou com ho that the test with
the co. 1-official sint of them. 11 1650-
lieved that there verital arton to woul conclume that
the favored expanking SE in France at the tone of the
newly formed Precite for Prve June, which ar the
general ng roval of ta prisent fresca Lovuru cit. this it
have an adverse effect on State De art entle relation vit.. the
Forel m Office, and it well joy, andino CIA's on polition with
jus,
the French Intelligence Larvicio, pericly
20
present autants to obtain mission to crat and mes in rat co
for operational u.c.
"
(c) It is believed that an indi onus French critice
is in a butter cition than an A or can
weal with the
partiellas problems that and rechte in frauen, and to give leser
ship and urdity to the Gáire lave cut in France. At present the
✓
Recity an
n'

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_208.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
MEMORANDUM FOR:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Request by NCFE for Gearing
1
1
}
}
MAY 28 1952
+
+
1. Messrs. Miller and Braden met with me on 22 May for
discussion of the above subject.
2. Taking into account the need of NCFE for a political advisor,
the qualifications and personality of Gearing, and the availability
of qualified personnel, the following course of action was fully
discussed and adopted.
8. Mr. Braden will attempt to recruit Bolte to serve
initially with NCFE as political advisor and join the Agency
at some later date.
b. Gearing will return to leadquarters later this year
and assume the duties of the Labor Desk in the IO Division.
In coordination with WE, Mr. Braden will follow up with Gearing,
possibly in connection with a trip to Europe in the near future.
0.
Richard Aldrich will replace Gearing in Paris. Mr. Miller,
who already has had one tentative conversation with Aldrich, will
follow in coordination with WE.
.
Gerald E. Milleg
for
KILAGURNE JOHNSTON
Assistant Director for
Policy Coordination
7
7
DADPC/GEM/mgb
27 May 1952
Distribution: Addressee
CIO - 1
-
CWE 1
RI/FE - 2
DADPC --1-
-
Orig.
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_203.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SETY INFORMATION
KEMORANDUM FOR:
DULJECT:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
Project TPTONI C
4 June 1952
1. On 18
On 18 April 1952 the Project Review Committee recommended
to the DCI approval of Project TPTOMIC calling for the payment of
$488,991 to the Crusade for Freedom for 1953. As a ridor to its
recommendation for approval of the project, the Committee made the
following provision: that a consulting firm be employed by CIA at
a consultant's fee to investigate the Crusade operation, both from
the standpoint of substance and administration with particular
attention to cost.
2. This provico was made at the instance of Mr. Hedden, Inspector
General. I argued at this meeting that since the Crusade itself was
a fund-raising agency and employed another fund-raising agency to help
it, the employment of a third fund-raising agency as consultant was
comparable to placing an advertising contract with N. W. Ayer and
then placing another contract with Young & Rubicam to investigate
H. W. Ayer's conduct 'under the contract. Mr. Heddon insisted in
response that this was reasonable business practice and his view
carried the day.
3. Several weeks ago, with all the tact that I could muster,
I conveyed to Admiral Miller, the President of NCFE, my intention to
employ the firm of Harold Oram or some other fund-raising agency or
individual whom he might care to suggest as a consultant to me and
the Crusade operation. Admiral Miller said he would like time to
think about this.
4. With kindly intent but considerable firmness, Admiral Miller
told me on 3 June that after thinking it over he had decided that if
this step were taken he would resign as President of NCFE. He went
on to say that he had taken this job at our request and because he
had been told that we placed confidence in him to run an efficient
operation. He had worked hard trying to make the operation efficient;
Le had particularly noted that the Crusade was not run according to
SEORET
:
2.9745

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_209.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
C
0
P
Y
SECKET
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR NR. ROBERT P. JOYCE
Folicy Planning Staff
epartment of State
27 May 1952
..
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Statements by Ronald D. Jeancon, HFE, London
My memorandum to you dated 23 April 1952
1. On 23 April 1952 I wrote you stating that Ad::iral Miller
was going to discuss with Ronald D. Jeancon statements accredited
to Jeancon which appeared in an interview in the London Daily
Worker, and that I would let you know the results of this conversa-
tion.
2. Admiral Miller, after an interview with Jeancon, informs
me that a correspondent for the worker interviewed Jeancon and that
subsequently a story appeared in the worker which was completely
unfactual, the fact of the interview being used as a peg on which
to hang Jeancon, and RFE.
3. The charges made against Jeancon have therefore been
dropped.
CIO; T..B/eh
Orig % 1
->>>
Addressee
1 cc
-
->
DD/F (the ADFC)
10/NIC
1 cc
10
2 cc
RI
S
CHAN. SADEN
Carbon copy of above re turned by
· Mr. Joyce on 4 June ad th
-
State
comment:
Why did he get mixed up with a Daily
Worker man? Such naivete makes one
wonder about his usefulness.
FPJ

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
NATIONAL INFORMATION BUREAU, Inc.
IMPORTANT.
!
This report is a privileged communication and is strictly for the confidential information of the
person or organization to whom it is addressed.
AMERICAN COM-ITTEE ON UNITED FUPOPE, INC,
-
· 3 -
i
April 27, 1951
:
FINANCES: A financial audit for the nearly twenty-one month period from inception,
February 16, 1949, to October 31, 1950 shows: cash contribution income, $210,919;
disbursements, $192,012. Disbursements includes grants to Europesu groupe, 456,651;
European conferences, 311,963; Popular education, $19,674; fund-raising expenses,
26,201, and administrative expenses, $38,583. Cash balance, October 31, 1950, wüs
$17,846.
Contributions to the American Committee are reported to be exempt for income tax
purposes.
Budget for the your to October 31, 1751 totals $150,000, of which $100,000 is for
European operations.
COMMENT AND CONCLUSION: It is difficult to measure the influence of organizations under-
taking to influence the mass public; however, we can report that the Bureru knows of no
reason why those interested should not contribute to this Committee.
NATIONAL INFORMATION EURFAU, INC.
;

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_210.jpeg ---
14-00000
PS COORMATION
23 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. KOPERT P. JOYCE
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
Statements by Ronald D. Joancon, RFE, London
Letter y April 1:52 Robert G. Hooker, Jr. to
Robert P. Joyce
7
1. Frank Wimer passed on to me the note from Bob Hooker
about the article in the Daily Worker on Wednesday, April 2,
quoting Mr. Jeancon.
2.
I had learned of Mr. Jeancon's outburst within a few
days after he made it and I passed the information on at once
to Admiral Miller of HCKE. Admiral Miller was greatly disturbed
by Jeancon's remarks and corroborated Hooker's suggestion that
he had done this type of thing before.
3. Admiral Miller promised to put the Jeancon affair ligh
on his agenda for his present trip abroad. He will discuss the
incident with Jeancon and he contemplates dismissing him. I
will let you know the result of Admiral miler's conversation
with Jeancon asioon as I get word.
Enclosure
Reference letter and
newspaper clipping.
CIO: TWR/eh
Contes 1 & 2 - Addressee
Copy 3
Cor: 4
C-Fy 5
Cory 6
- DD/P (the ADPC)
->>>
CI
t
TRAS W. FRADEN
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_211.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
I
In reply refer to: -2062
22 May 1952
8
Dear Leonardı
In order to continue our practice of putting things on paper,
I want to tell you by this note that I have been instructed by the
Erector to hire the services of Harold Gram as a fund-raising
consultant on the Crusade for Freedom. At some time in the near
fature I hope you will penit Nelson Nicander to bring fram and
yoursalf, or anyone ales with whom you care to deal, together to
Äscuss means by which we can fulfill this requirement.
In addition, I have been instructed to notify you that after
this year's program, the Crusade for Freedon budget should be ma
mab-
stantially out.
You will gather from the foregoing that, like yourself, va
hars bean giving careful consideration here to the whole Crusadı:
program and we have some ideas about strengthening the Crugače
thas I personally feel Orm is by all means the best man to
into effect. I have asked Helson to outline these to you and get
your thoughts. Provided you agres, I should like to get started
with Gran on this particular job, a part of the Crusade program -
Hals will explain to you, right away.
Sincerely,
40. The
Orig
Addresses
100- 10/20g
R/DEC
100 -
20 - E
St.
Oliver E. Radwood
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_213.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
43
3
-
1
21 May 1952
DEFUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Proposed Statement on NCFE
I feel that Attachment A, the statement handed to us by
Admiral Miller, is apologetic in tone and I have drafted Attach-
ment B which I believe is more positive and would be a better
press release for NCFE in the unhoped for event that a press
release is called for.
2 Attachments
CIO: TWB/Ch
Orig - DDCI (thru DD/P)
1 ee - Io/merc
1 co- CIO
2 co - RX
}
:
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
!
SECRET
}

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_212.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
S
22 May 1952
MYMORANDUM POR: SPECIAL ASSISTANT FOR THEPECTION AND REPORTS
Suspension of Falloon Operations by Order of DCI
SUBJECT 1
1. The Crusade for Freedon proposed launching about 60,000
balloons toward Hungary during Faster Week, 1752, each carrying a
traditional Hungarian Easter Groeting together with a package of
searce household articles such as rasor blades, needles, soap, sippers
bouillon cubes, vitamin pills, ote. This project was known as
*Operation Easter Bunny."
2. At their meeting on Friday, 7 March 1952, the Project Review
Committed withheld approval of this project pending discussion with
the Director of two unresolved printer
A. Approval by the British of launchings from their tone
of Austria.
The question of including packaged items with the
Easter Greetings.
3. On or about Tuesday, 11 March, pr/? telephoned to T. W. Fraden,
CTO, in the temporary absence of DCPY, and advised substantially as
follows:
"Operation Easter Bunny is off by the personal decision of
DCI. This decision to cancel has been reached for an entirely
new reason that you can find in an article on the 3rd pago aP
today's YORK TIMES."
The article cited by m/P was a report of continued Commund st
escusations that Cern Warfare was being waged by UN forcse in Korea.
4. The Crusade people in New York were advised that their project
was cancelled and no further amplification of rel's ruling was received.
DCPT/BOLinl
H. GATES LLOYD
eputy Chief
Paychological Staff Division
Distributions
010
-
Addressse Original; CIO - 1; GPT - 11 DC/Y = 1; RI - 2

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_214.jpeg ---
14-00000
?
PROPOSED STATEMENT
(Draft #4, 20 May 1952)
Its National Committee for a Free Europe is an organ zation of
American citizens whose purpose is to encourage the spread of freedom
in Europe. It is a membership corporation, chartered under the laws
of the State of New York.
Is its attempt to spread the doctrine of freedom and consequently
to combat Soviet totalitarianisa, the Committee operates radio stations
de pierce the Iron Curtain; it operates a university at Strasbourg
for young men and women who have escaped from behind the Iron Curtain;
it attempts by other means than radio to carry messages of hope and
of the possibility of oventual liberation to the nations which are now
salsved; it conducts studies of the laws, customs and cultures of
these nations as they existed prior to Soviet occupation; and it
écements the changes which have been imposed by the Soviet so that
if the time should come when the people rise against their conquerors,
they may more easily establish continuity with their past.
In all of this work the Ommittee draws information and support
from many sources - from those who have escaped and who must remain
anonymous for fear of reprisals on their families at home, from those
in this country who wish to work voluntarily for the cause of freedon
abroad, from the American people at large, and from government agencies
in the American tradition, give all possible aid to private citi sens
engaged in a public canse,
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_216.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
"
CONFIDENTIAL
Security Information
ER-2-8556
30 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations
Deputy Director Central Intelligence
FROM:
Attached is the proposed statement to be issued by
NCFE in the event that their cover is blown. I am not
very happy with it and suggest that we try to improve it.
I have sent a copy to Frank Wisner.
}
Encl.
t
CONFIDENTIAL
Security Information
ALLEN W. DULLES
T
i
!
:
r
:
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_215.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
Fund raising for the Committee is done by a subsidiary, the
Crusade for Freedom which, in the course of raising money, also helps
to keep before the American people and people throughout the world the
need for spreading the idea of freedom. For example, the Freedom Ball,
which now rings regularly over the City of Berlin, was the gift of
sixteen million Americans who contributed to the Crusade for Freedom.
All in all, signatures and voluntary donations from more than twenty-five
million Americans have come to the Crusade for Freedom to date. Generous
contributions have also been made to the Committee by private foundations,
and payments have been received from interested government agencies for
which the Committee has undertaken special projects.
A Board of Directors consisting of prominent American citizens
from all walks of life determine the policies and supervise the opera-
tions of the Committee.
MARET
=
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_217.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
1
1.
010
RECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
19 May 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COORDINATION
SUBJECT:
National Committee for a Free Europe
1. I am naturally disturbed by the report which has reached
me as to your attitude on the National Committee for a Free Europe,
as expressed to the Inspector General at a meeting last week which
I was unable to attend because of absence from the city.
2. This attitude, as described to me, was that you knew very
little about NCFE but that you had the general impression that it
was rather loosely handled from an administrative and policy control
standpoint. I do not wish to go into the history of NCFE control by
CIA and be accused of casting aspersions on its handling in the past.
I do think, however, that your allegations may be correct so far as
the past is concerned.
3. As of the present, however, I want you to know that
Mr. Durkee and I, with very able assistance from members of
Mr. Durkee's staff, are doing our level best to set up agreed upon
procedures for administrative, financial and policy control and
reporting. With the best objectivity I can muster, I think that
your responsibility over the National Committee for a Free Europe
is now being ably discharged,
4. I would like at your convenience to go over the new
arrangements that have been made and to bring you completely up
to date on the activities of the Committee, as well as to get your
instructions as to a system of making such periodic reports to you
in the future. This briefing might well take the form of a prelim-
inary budget review and I suggest that the division heads of NCFE
might be brought down to make progress reports to you in the briefing
room. I am hopeful that after such a meeting you will feel not only
conversant with the present arrangements and activities of the
Committee but that they will, with modifications you may wish to
14
C
STORE.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_218.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
TRAGALL
suggest, have your full approval, and that consequently you will
wish to make some statement at an early staff meeting indicating
your satisfaction with these plans. Otherwise, I very much fear
that the prevalent attitude within OPC which is one of general
dissatisfaction with NCFE based largely on inadequate understanding
of what the Committee is doing may prejudice the work that with your
concurrence I brought Bill Durkee here to do.
Thomas Baden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
CIO: TWB/ch
Orig
-
Addressee
1 cc 10/TONIC
1 cc
2 cc
-
-
CO
-
RI

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_219.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
1
SECRET
Security Information
MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR
t
19 May 1952
You will be interested in the attached letter from
Matthew Holl resigning from NCFE. We were forewarned
of this some weeks ago by Jay and others.
We will be in touch with NCFE with respect to the
form of their answer if they decide to make one.
Enal.
cc: DD/P
001
C/IO
Rescutive Regist
2-1200
ALLEN W. DULLES
1
i
:
r
}
1
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_22.jpeg ---
14-00000
54
1
SEXART
LETTER OF CONFIRMATION
In reply refer
tos W-19.23
13 March 1952
Dear Freds
Thank you for your report of 5 Farch 1952 on Horvat.
Attached hereto are copies of the original correspondence.
We should appreciate your making a direct acknowledg
ment to Horvat on behalf of Mr. Leury as requested in his
20 February letter. We have acknowledged the receipt of
Mr. Dawey's letter and have indicated to him that we vere
referring the matter to appropriate hands,
We should appreciate receiving a copy of the reply
which you send to Horvat.
Yours sincerely,
Oliver Hadwood
Attachment
Attachment was handed to John on 12 March 1952.
CIO/mo from ADFC to DD/P of 13 March 1952)
Distribution:
Orig
-
Addressee
1 - PY/Ex Asst
->>>
CIO✓
2
- RI
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_220.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
1
FREE TRADE UNION COMITTEE
Labor League for Hutan Rights
Box 65, Radio City Station
New York 1º, N. Y.
May 13, 1952
;
Admiral H. B. Miller, President
National Cont ttee for Free Burne, mc.
110 West 57th Strect
New York City
Dear Admiral Millers
Your Canittee has decided that "its Interest and work
lie in labor relations chiefly in Surope and not in the
United Stato :
1
We disagree with your polley which we are convinced is
wrong.
You have translated your new polley into action by dis-
missing our active representative, danry Kirsch, whose work
had won your own as well as general hearty acclain and brought
great credit to your organization. Iht add that this
dismissal care after an agreement in Paris by your former
President, and now Vice-Chaiman with our European represen
tative, irving Brown, and your own suropos representative,
Leon Damon, to have Hr. Kirsen end your Labor Division.
Furthermore, we had been assured by Mr. Berlo that Mr.
Kirsch woule not be dismissed without first giving us an
opportunity to study specific cowlants and cause for said
discharge. This promise has likewise not been kept.
In view of the above, there can be no point in my con-
tinuing nanbership in your body. I, therefore, herewith
tender my resignation to take effect insediately.
Sincerely yours,
SIGNED
MATTHEW WOLL, Chairman
International Labor Relations
Come and Free Trade Union
Comittee, AFL
>
---

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_222.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
3
-
SECRET
Security Information
d: 14 May
RANDUE FOR: CHIEF, IO
SUBJECT:
Albanian Deak of RFL
Secret Memorandum dated 1 April 1952, to Sr. Campbell,
EE, from Ur. Harcy, EE, same subject. (Attached)
1. It may be that Mr. Dosti was aware that there was little
possibility that either Mr. Skendi or Er. Chekrezi 'would be willing
to become head of the Albanian Desk of RFE and that he hoped his
third choice of one of the Jakovas would therefore be accepted.
Rosever, we do not consider that this is any proof that Hr. Dosti
has sold out to Zog.
2. Mr. Dosti is rather easily influenced and has been impressed
by the Jakovas and their position in emigre circles in New York City.
Consequently, there is no doubt he would like to be in the position of
sponsoring the Jakovas and we believe he sincerely felt one of them
would make a good head for the Albanian Desk of RFL.
te agreo with EN/State that no consideration should be fiven
to offering either Jakova a position with RIE and with their descri; tion
of the couple; our attitude has been made known to NT on several
occasions during the past six months.
Durice les original:
Secund
GRATIAN H. YATS:VITCHI
Deputy for Folicy Coordination, SE
SECRET
ammation

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_221.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
i
i
(
SECRET
Security Information
1
€
MEMORANDUM TO: CHIEF, IQ
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE!
Albanian Students at the Free Europe University
Secret Momorandum dated 24 April 1952 to Deputy Chief,
SE/PC from Chief, 10, cubject: Future of Strasbourg
Free Europe University Students
1. We appreciate receiving the information on the two Albanian
students now attending the Free Europe University at Strasbourg which
was forwarded in reference.
2. We have now received a report from the field which indicates
that Koste Xhajanka is connected with the Albanian legation in Paris.
3. We would like very much to know the background of this man's
acceptance at the Free Europe University, including how and where his
application was made; whether his acceptance was on the basis of his
scholastic record alone or on the basis of recommendations; if the
latter, whose; and any other details available. It would be appreciated
if you could inquire into this matter for us.
4. Since requesting that favorable consideration be given to
the application of Ramis Qira, we have received a report which in-
dicates that he too has been connected with the Albanian IS. It is
requested that steps be taken to ensure that his application be dis-
approved.
5. It has also been reported that a Kalem Golemi, also covertly
employed by the Albanian Legation in Paris, has applied for admission
to the Free Europe University.
6. All of these reports appear to indicate that an effort is
being made by the Albanian Government to place their agents in the
Free Europe University. If this is true, no doubt other satellite
countries will follow the same policy. It is suggested that the
authorities of Free Europe Univercity be warned and advised to screen
carefully the students being admitted and to refuse admission to
people about whom there is any question.
:
}
↓
1
GATIAN K. YATSEVITCH
Derati Folicy Coordination, SE
SEOPET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_224.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
MEMORAHIM FORT MR. ROBERT F. JOYCE
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Policy i lanaing staff
Department of State
Comundat Infiltration of HFR
Confidential Remorandum dated 21 October frum
Al Freeman to Foy Kohler
1. On 2 November 1951 you told us of certain charges you
had heard that RFE was being infiltrated.
2. Similar charges have been made by others. We therefore
anked NCFE to investigato these chargon and we also turned them
over to our own Security Officers. I straching for your infor
mation a letter which contains the results of the investigation
made by ROFK. You will observe that the specific charges made
against Ingenieur Halik and Kristina kamlerova are not answered
but we believe the enclosed constitutes en snover to the general
charge of infiltration of the Czechoslovakian desk, as the major
figures involved are dealt with fally.
3. If, subsequently, our own investigation in mich Halik
and Amalerova will be dealt with brings to light any new fanta
or fails to corroborate any of the facts stated in the enclomire,
wa will tako nation imzodiately and will also keep you informed.
Enclosure
Ltr 25 Apr with
Exhibits from #CF%
CIO: TWB/ah
(8 May 1952)
Orig & 1 » Addressce
-
IO/TOMIC
- E.R. (1 for DD/Y)
- BE
1 00
200
200
100
CO
- RT
I&S (Mr. Cotter)
FHAHN O. WI STUN

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_225.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
10 Mary 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: 10/TOMIC - Miss Stern
SUBJECT:
Memorandum on Reorganization of Bulgarian
National Committee dated April 23, 1952
1. I am disturbed by the fact indicated in this memorandum
that the State Department, namely Campbell, is attempting to lay
down the line almost to the precise language which Admiral Miller
uses with the political refugees.
2. It seems to me at some time or other that somebody will
have to tell Campbell that while it is the State Department's
job to make policy, the only way NCFE can possibly conform to
Campbell's ideas is to appoint Campbell to deal with exiles and
ask him whether he wants a job.
3. I have a feeling that this is going to come to a head
one of these days and I wish you would build up a little file
on Campbell and his efforts in this direction.
Attachment
Subject memo❤
CIO: TWB/Ch
Orig
->
Addressee
200 - CIO
:
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_223.jpeg ---
:
1
14-00000
t
1
"
SEGRET
}
14 May 1952
KESOPANDUM FOR: DEPUTY ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COORDINATION
SUBJECT:
Radio Free Europe
The following may be helpful in today's briefing of hr. Hedilen.
1. RFE is presently broadcasting about 135 hours a week to
Albania, Bulgaria, Rumania, Poland, Hungaria, and Czechoslovakia.
2.
To date approximately $8,500,000 have been invested in
capital radio facilities including housing. About 310,000,000 have
been spent in radio operations to date over and above capital costs.
3. About 1144 people are presently emmloyed in Munich and 226
are presently employed in Fortugal at the relay facility.
A technical onerating survey of these facilities was
recently conducted by Westinghouse radio and technical experts.
They evaluated as excellent both the facilities and the operating
program. A copy of this report is attached.
b. The effectiveness of broadcasts from a psychological
warfare point of view is considerable, as far as can be determined
with interviews with escapees, State Department officials behind the
Curtain, and Soviet attacks including jamming. RFE has also been
surveyed by a key official of the Fsychological Strategy Board with
the conclusion that it is one of the most effective U.S. psychological
varfare efforts and should without question be continued.
--
c. The risk taken to invest several million dollars in
capital facilities in Germany is a calculated one fully recognized
and discussed, at length at a recent PRC meeting. It is considered
a reasonable risk under the circumstances. The understandings
reached with representatives of the German government are considered
to be as good as can be worked out at this time.
4. Mr. William Durkee, Chief of the National Committees cranch/10,
plans to make an inspection trip to Europe leaving May 23 to visit
AFE facilities. On his return it is expected that we will have
additional first hand information to report to you.
DONS 8. ERƠ:1
Executive Officer
International Organizations Division
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_226.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
ļ
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
ļ
|
9 May 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
SUBJECT:
Letters of Mr. C. D. Jackson Concerning
Possible Communist Disturbances Among
Hungarian Emigres.
6470
REFERENCE:
Your memorandum, above subject, 25 April 1952.
}
1. In compliance with your request, the allegations
contained in Hr. Jackson's letters pertaining to Az Ember
and Ferenc Göndör have been forwarded to the FBI.
2. On the Hennyey case, it has been ascertained that
the files of this office contain considerable data relative
to Hennyey's background and activities. There is no infor-
mation of a derogatory nature in these files, however, to
explain a refusal to issue a visa. No record appears of
information being furnished either to the State Department.
or to the Imigration and Naturalization Service by CIA on
Hennyey. OSO is now in process of preparing a reply to a
query from the Ianigration and Naturalization Service on
him. OSO is, therefore, at a loss to offer an explanation
of Hennyey's visa difficulties.
L
I
}
:
Heavick
LYMAN B. KIRKPATRICK
Assistant Director
Special Operations
Durkee has origines
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_227.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
2-9187
I
GY A
May 7, 1952
708 Jackson Ft. N.W.
Washington 25, D.C.
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
PRESENT: Mr. W. J. Scripps, Detroit News
Dr. Allan
Mr. Norberg
Mr. Korns
After arranging an appointment through his cousin, Senator Noody,
Mr. Scripps called on the Director to discuss his proposal for a
"Friendship Balloon Lift." Certain materials relating to this proposal
had previously been transmitted to the Director by fir. Allen Dulles,
In reply to questioning, Mr. Scripps asserted that he was well
acquainted with the CFB winds of freedom campaign, in which he had
participated, but that he had not discussed his present proposal with
MCFR. He said he had talked to many American business man, who ware
all enthusiastic and were prepared to donate the variety of products
which he proposes should be included in the payloads. He said that his
father was an ardent supporter of the project, along with a Mr. Fletcher,
Vice President of the Caterpillar Tractor Company and Dr. Harnett.
Mr. Fletcher spent some time in Russia, he said, When asked whether
Caterpillar was in the balloon business, Mr. Scripps said no.
Other names mentioned by Mr. Scripps as being familiar with his
proposal included Nick Naradi, identified as an ex-minister of the
Hungarian Government; Frank Jewitt of General ills (which holds a
balloon research contract with the Office of Naval Research), who has
given him a letter to an admiral; an Admiral Killer; and a Mr. Frank
of CIA. (see below)
(see below) Mr. Scripps also mentioned a 'Paychological äquip-
ment Development Office located in the old Post Office building.
(see below)
Mr. Scripps was troubled by security problems. It was appa rent
that he felt he had obtained confidential information from certain govern-
Kent sources which he could not disclose. At the same time, he stated
that in order to work out his proposal in any detail, he would need
access to information presently denied him. Therefore, he suggested
that he be cleared for security by the appropriate agency.
As a result, it proved impossible to nail down the technical
aspects of Mr. Scripps' proposal. In his formal presentation, he had
described a balloon capable of carrying a 40-pound payload and costing
$5. In his conversation, he mentioned a vehicle capable of carrying
300 to 800 pounds, together with a staggered release mechanism--without
CONFECTIV
SECURITY INFORMATION
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_229.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
2-8852
SECRET
Sexarty Information
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director, Plans
FROM:
Deputy Director Central Intelligence
7 May 1952
1
1. In the course of a long conversation with C. D. Jackson
and John Hughes on Thursday evening, 1 May, they raised a number
of questions about NCPE, including the question as to whether
Gearing could be made available for their work. Confidentially,
they feel that Miller who is excellent on the administrative side
will be badly in need of someone at his right hand who knows the
political situation in Europe and the type of thing that cannot
be learned by a few trips or a few books.
2. I told them that the bearing problem was difficult, that
we were considering it and hoped to come up with some answer in
the near future..
CC:
Mr. Braden ✓
!
:
1
L
SECRET
Sousity interaction

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_228.jpeg ---
14-00000
price. To questions
price. To questions as to whether either type was in existence, Nr.
Scripps replied that he was bound by confidences. In general, however,
he did not foresee any technical barriers. ·
when asked how he would finance his proposal, Mr. Scripps said
that he would begin with private contributions, with the thought that
eventually the program would be taken over by the government. He laid
stress on the need for early organisation (o.g. fund raising, balloon
stockpiling, crow training, selection of launching sites) in order that
operations could be started immediately following a decision as to that
desirability. He stated that 90 days would be sufficient to prepara
for operations, once he got the "green light".
Dr. Allen expressed his personal interest in the proposal, but
reminded Mr. Scripps that P50's field was strategic rather than opera-
tional, and that in an operational proposal of such complexity, PSB
could only give the matter a cursory review. Therefore, Lr. Allen stated
his intention to forward the proposal to the Psychological Operations
Coordinating Committes, which was the proper body to give the project
the detailed screening to which it was entitled. Ur. Allen also sug-
gested that Mr. Scripps see C. D. Jackson,
Mr. Norberg then suggested that as an additional aid Mr. Scripps
prepare a brief but fairly specific description of what he personally
was prepared to do, along with an outline of the organization which would
be needed to carry out the project. Hr. Scripps said that he would do
so within the next week.
COMMANT
Joe Frank, when asked about Mr. Scripps, said he had met him several
times between December 1950 and February, 1951. During this period of
early planning for balloon operations, Frank said that Scripps proved
quite helpful by quieting curtain private untimusiasts, in addition to
maintaining a discreet silence himself. Frank did not know for a fact
that Mr. Scripps participated in the August uporation, but judged that
it was likely. In frank's opinion, Scripos is a capable person with
valuable connections in the business world and mufficient financial
independence to be mole to devote most of his time to good works. Frank
thinks it would be a good idea to have him cleared as a consultant.
The Psychological Equipment Development Office mentioned by str.
Scripps is believed to be the Physical Security Eripment Agency, a
military development agency operated by the Air Force under an USD
chartar. Its director is Col. H. M. ctoy. This agency is prepared to
talk with anyone who has been cleared for security; otherwise individuals
are asked to approach the services first,
Distributions
Dr. Allen
Mr. Sherman
Mr. Norberg
Mr. Gates Lloyd
CINAKOS INS

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_232.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
f
SECRET
Security Inform
to have any other written obligations to them and if so, specifically to
include all such in the termination agreement.
.1
r
CHATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, SE
:
:
:
SECRET
Security Information
:
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_230.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
MEMORANDUM FOR:
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
6 May 1952
INTERNATICHAL ORGANILATIONS DIVISION
Mr. Thoman Braden
Liaison with NCFE
1. This memorandin will confirm the discussion between Mr. Thaman
Braden, Chief, IOD, Mr, William Durkee, IOD and Ir. Prickett of SE/PC,
on Thursday, 1 May, wherein it was agreed that shortly after Admiral
Miller's return from Europe on or about 7 Hay, Hr. Braden would work
out with NCFE the details of establishing limited liaison between the
Chiefs of the Albanian, Bulgarian, and Ihumanian Branches of SE/PC, and
their opposite numbers at the New York office of NCFZ. The above
arrangement would be only a complement to the main liaison channel with
NCFE which will remain through ir. John Leich. It would, however, expedite
action in situations where minor guidance is required in matters relating
to the handling of the Albanian, Bulgarian and Rumanian Committees and
where a precipitate unilateral decision on the part of the NCFE desk
officer concerned might affect adversely CIA plans or operations.
2. It was generally agreed that to establish the relationship
only the following need be arranged:
8. A brief covert introductory meeting between the respective
country desk Chiefs during which the SE/PC Branch Chief could out-
line, in as far as was appropriate, the rims of the CIA program
and after which mutual difficulties could be discussed end joint
courses of action determined.
b. Establishment of an emergency link through a sterile CIA
telephone which would permit secure liaison in special situations.
C. Institution of a system of preparing detailed Memoranda of
Conversation for Mr. Eraden's office in every instance where there
was contact between an NCHE desk officer and his SE/FC opposite number.
Should any assistance be required from SE/PC in establishing
this relationship Mr. Prichett, SE/PC/PO (Extension 3971) my be called.
3.
14
GRATIAN H. YATSEVITCHI
Deputy for Policy Coordination, SE
15

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
HORVAT, Pavle
March 5, 1952
Pavle Horvat is of Slovenian origin, about 50 years old and was
born in the Prlekija district near the Hungarian border (formerly a
part of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy).
Horvat became known during the thirties through his numerous
manifestos and posters by which he attempted to organize his own
political movement. This "movement" was labeled various names at
different times. At one time it was simply referred to as a "peasant
movement," at another time as the "Slovenia Section of the Croatian
Peasant Party," and still later as an "independent Slovenian peasant
movement. He never had, however, any following and never set up his
own electoral lists. On the other hand, it is true, that the Croat
Peasant Party of Dr. "acek considered him as one of its trustees in
Slovenia for a short period.
He earned his living as a farmer. He also had a small village
grocery shop and occupied himself in his district with "interventions,"
that is, performing all types of secretarial services for the peasants
of the area. Among other things, he undertook to organize the
transportation of the seasonal workers who went to France and
Germany during the harvesting months. He had difficulties with the
home authorities and police in this respect and had to appear before
the courts on a number of occasions
At the beginning of the war he fled to Zagreb, Croatia, at that
time the Independent Croat State (Nazi purpet regime) of Dr. Pavelic.
There he set up a small office for the relief of Slovenian refugees
but it never reached any large proportions. He was not connected
with the Refugee Committee which handled the main relief work (One
source cointed out that the mere fact that he was able to establish
an office and function in Zagreb during the period meant that he was
at least passively acceptable to the Nazi regime.
As far back as 1935 he is known to have misrepresented himself
as a "peasant leader."
After the war Pavle Horvat fled to Austria where he again claimed
to be a Slovenian peasant leader and attempted to whip up propaganda
for the creation of a srecial "peasant group," among the Slovenian
refurces; he failed completely. He was unable to find followers in
a single carp to form such a group, and the refugees refused to attend
his meetings. In addition he is known to have boasted that he was
acting on behalf of Kr. hacek and the International Peasant Union,
though he was mandated by neither. The Allied authorities were
finally forced to intervene and bring a stop to his activities since
they were causing discontent among the refugees and disorders in the
DP camps..
7
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_231.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Inf
1
3-
ing
6 y 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: C/10
SUBJECT:
Termination of Cntract between Mr. Harry P. Landowski
and the National Committee for a Free iuroyo,
1. It would be appreciated if I would assist this division by
requesting from the National Committee for a Free Europe an agreement
terminating the contract between the NCFE and Mr. Henry F. Landowski,
signed 1 October 1951. dr. Landowski's employment with CIA le being
terminated and it is desired that for reasons of administrative regularity
and considerations of security his contract with NCFE also be terminated..
2. In working out the phruising of the termination agreement it is
desirable that the following points be included:
a. The contract being terminated is that signed 1 October
1951 by Ur. Landowaki on the one hand and Mr. Spencer Phenix for
the HIFE,
b. It should be stated that the contract is being termin-
ated "by mutual agreement" and that all benefits and obligations
devolving upon the two parties are cancelled.
C.
It is very desirable that this document also be signed
by Hr. Phenix, who signed the original contract agreement for
the NCFE.
3. If three copies of this termination agreement signed by the NCFE
are returned to this office we will have Hr. Landowski sign and return
a copy for Um NCFE files.
4. It is our understanding that there is only one contract between
Mr. kandowski and the NCFI, namely that of 1 October 1951. Mr. Landowski
assures us that this is the only contract he has signed with the NQFE,
However, it is possible that there may be a misunderstanding on this point
by NCFL. Therefore it might be wall to ask Adk if they believe hr. Landowski
Oring to Dunker
SECRET
Seem
smay
to have

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_233.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
}
"
**
1
Mc Campbell & COMPANY
Forty Worth Street
New York 1:3, N.Y.
;
-ER29553
April 28, 1952
Dear Frank,
I found the attached memorandum of real interest as pro-
viding a clear-cut explanation of a matter relating to N.C.F.E.
which you are doubtless asked about from time to time. It oc-
curred to me that you might like to have this as covering the
basic policy used in the selection and employment of ezile
personnel for verious branches, particularly for the work of
Radio Free Europe. To my mind it provides an answer to in-
quiries which come to us and others as to how and why such
personnel is chosen.
Since Min Miller is away and won't be back for several
weeks I am taking the liberty of sending this copy to you in
his absence. He and others at 57th Street read it before he
went away and endorsed it.
With personal regards,
Sincerely,
nighes
;

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_234.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
1
NCFE EXILE PERSONNEL SELECTION IN RELATION TO
(1) EXILE POLITICS,
(2) RFL BROADCAST POLICY, AND
(3)
EXTERNAL CRITICISM
A.
Formative Stage
- I -
INTRODUCTORY HISTORY
At its inception, the National Committee for a Free Europe
believed that its Iron Curtain broadcasting operation, Hadio Free
Europe, could and should be developed and pursued through the medium
of "National Councils" or "Committees of Liberation" composed of
exile groups from the target countries. It was considered that
prominent exile leaders and personalities of each nationality group
could express to their captive countrymen, entirely without American
advice and guidance, the message of hope which NCP proposed to send.
This concept was not fulfilled. Experience in attempting to weld a
talented, dedicated group of exiles into a non-partisan broadcasting
operation early demonstrated that without American control the mission
of HFE would be lost in the jungle of exile-world politics. It soon
became evident that the leadership among the exiles was neither suffi-
ciently strong nor personally willing to rise above the political cross
currents, factional rivalries, and splinter-group weaknesses character-
istically reminiscent of the political affairs of all kastern European
countries. These factors militated against the original plan of permitting
·

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_236.jpeg ---
14-00000
sought that objective, while Czechs desired opposite views to be aired
and advocated the rebirth of pre-war Czeshoslovakia. Each group sponsored
and insisted upon employment of its own more or less qualified adherents
upon the assumption that its special views would be thereby expressed
to the captive Czechoslovak audience of RFb. Similar activities were
pursued by Hungarians, Bulgarians, and Poles until the futility of per-
mitting the exile Councils to control the destiny and broadcasting
policies of RFE was made clear beyond refutation. It became tragically
obvious that uncontrolled exile-world Councils and professional poli-
ticians could not agree on personnel selection or program content.
In spite of every effort to induce harmony in and obtain proper
cooperation from the "Councils", "Committees", and individuals, RFE was
confronted with an impasse. The alternative theory and present policy
of American selection of non-political exile personnel was the only way
out. It has worked. Technically qualified personnel produce properly
oriented programs -- and have been doing so with documented success
since July, 1950. Disappointed exile politicians, professional exile
camp followers, disturbed American special pleaders, and alarmed Communist
Agents all scream, snipe and snivel
--
but RFL programs are doing the job.
NCFE-RFE records of this stage can be supplied by Frederic R.
Dolbeare, Vice-President, National Councils Division, and Robert E. Lang,
Director, RFB. The current policy has the complete endorsement of these
officers and of the Board of Directors of NCFE.
-3-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_238.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
's
identified publicly with domestic political philosophies at issue in
their own countries. Many, in fact most of the staff people ure con-
troversial figures among their own countrymen in exactly the same way
that prominent Americans are controversial in our political arena. Many
indeed aro members of the Councils, but are men of sufficient stature
to give their primary allegiance to the non-partisan policy of RFE, The
decisive factor is that there be no controversy or question about their
anti-Communist convictions' and records.
At this point, it must be noted that our target countries have
been subject to repetitive political ferment prior to and following
World War II, as well as the successive occupations of Nasi and Communist
Armies.
--
The temper of the times, therefore, in which these exiles have
lived for the past fifteen years has been one of excitement, bitterness,
recrimination, rivalries, and personal turmoil all stemming from both
domestic and foreign strug: les for power. The times have produced a
bumper crop of refugee traitors, collaborators, and opportunists and at
the same time have developed pure Western style democrats, true national
patriots, and unselfish honest men. The exile who stood by placidly
through the era is not much food, however talented, as a militant messen-
ger of hope via RFE; exiles who were honorably active in public affairs
at home and who had radio talent were, therefore, the only kind of
personnel suitable for RFL purposes.
ge
As the necessity for American operational control of nationality
desks became self-evident, the only feasible personnel policy was to
- 5-
i
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_237.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
T
i
1
kadakal P_Bida na mape
¦
B. Development Stage
Upon the collapse of the original concept of broadcasting under
exile auspices, RFE necessarily utilized some exile personnel endorsed
and recommended by the leaders of the various nationality groups. As
technical radio facilities came into being, exiles with radio background
or writing talent were required for the production of programs.
This
involved using individuals eminently qualified by experience to do a
ty
radio job of script writing, announcing, acting, etc. without regard
for the fact that such individuals might be at odds with one or another
political faction or leader of an exile "Council". It also involved
elimination of proven inefficient, inept or unworthy individuals without
regard for their exile "Council" sponsorship. In either instance crit-
icism of RFE was predictable and indeed was always forthcoming
in virulent and dishonest form.
--> often
The day to day operation of RFE developed new techniques and
long range plans which made it is possible to employ non-entities of no
political color or conviction. The best people to produce programs in
harmony with NCFE-RFE purposes and policies necessarily were persons
known in their own countries for their views on domestic political af-
fairs and their anti-Communist activities. Hard-hitting propaganda
required hard-hitting personalities whose known association with RFE
and its programs would add validity and significance for our captive.
audiences. Gradually, therefore, the nationality desks of RFL at New
York and Munion were staffed with tested, qualified exiles who had been
-4-
↑

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_239.jpeg ---
14-00000
employ properly qualified individuals, regardless of exile politics.
In the execution of this policy individuals wo were useless were
eliminated without regard for political sponsors. This process still
goev on. Similarly, talented exile personalities recruited from any
source were employed wherever needed. This process still foes on.
Both processes are in vogue with a healthy disregard for exile political
muances and protests. Neither process is satisfactory to self styled
exile leaders, since it follows that the appointment of an individual
sponsored by one faction as a representative of its views inevitably
will evoke howls of rage and criticism from the opposite faction, This
is an accepted fact of exile life. he have to live with it and get on
with the job.
C. Summary
Our formative and development experiences evolved the present
and continuing exile personnel policies of RFE. Exile desk employees,
whether at New York or Munich, must respond to three tests:
(a) Security clearance,
(b) Endorsement of technical proficiency,
(c) Sufficient stature to eliminate exile partisan
interests from program content.
->
- II .
CRITERIA AND METHODS OF PERSONNEL SELECTION
A. Recruitment General Principles
-
The best source of exile personnel is referral by "non-
professional" exiles themselves. Among all nationalities there are
-6-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_235.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
axiles, through their loosely organized Councils or Committees, to
wholly develop, manage, and control RFE broadcasting.
Since the advent of RFE was the most important development
affecting the exiles which had occurred since their flight from home,
they quickly understood and applauded its implications and potential
effect on their futures. Through this instrument they could once
again become prominent and powerful in the affairs of the homeland;
once more they could contend for place and power.
Selection of personnel for the purpose at hand quickly became
a political football of rival leaders, personalities, and groups.
Rightists, Leftists, Centrists, Labor Elements, and Splinter-groups
argued with us for advancement of their particular personal or political
views. Sponsorship of their own adherents as RFE employees through whom
such views would be broadcast to their captive countrymen became the
pattern of their pseudo cooperation. This pattern was followed to such
an extent that ordinary progress and sensible development of our basic
purpose of truly free broadcasts under exile control soon appeared to
be not only impracticable, but dangerous. For example, the National
Councils Division attempted to inaugurate broadcasts to Czechoslovakia
under the auspices of a Czechoslovak National Council. The Council was
and is made up of exile personalities of differing political views and
parties. Its factions proceeded to engage in endless disputes and ir-
reconcilable claims for control of script production and program content.
Slovak "Separatists" arguing for the total independence of Slovakia
2
↑

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
T
0124
In July 1949, Horvat wrote the Honorable Joserh C. Grew in care
of the National Committee for a Free Europe introducing himself as
the Representative of the Democratic Slovenes and President of the
International Peasant Union for Europe, and suggesting that he join
forces with the Committee in the common strugele against Communism.
In return for a trip to the United States he offered to bring a
large confidential report on his activities to date and present a
scheme for successfully suppressing communism and delivering the
subjugated nations in the shortest possible time. He was informed
that the Fund was confining its activities to refugee leaders already
residing in the United States and that the proposed visit was
impossible at that time.
Horvat has recently announced his forthcoming arrival in the
United States. Several Slovenian and Croatian newspapers in this
country have received articles (which he wrote himself) glorifying
his past and present activities. None of them, so far, have taken any
notice of these articles with the exception of the Croat separatist
(pro-ustashi) paper, "DANICA," published in Chicago. Supposedly
Dr. Macek was highly amused on reading the article describing the
great "Slovene peasant leader."
Nobody in Slovenia in pre-war days would have considered Pavel
Horvat as a person to be taken seriously in public life. He is
considered by a number of sources a political impostor and as
personally unethical. Neither the International Peasant Union for
Europe, of which he claimed to be president, nor the Democratic
Slovenes, of which he is a representative, is considered a legitimate
organization. The Director of the Fund's Yugoslavian Research and
Information Desk was the editor of a daily paper in Slovenian for
eleven years before the war. He never met Horvath, seldom heard of
him and his paper, as far as he knew, never took notice of him or his
activities.
FOR THE RECORD: This recort (on Pavle Horvat dated 5 March 1952)
was forwarded to us by Mr. John Leich, assistant to .r. Dolbeare,
Director of the National Councils Division of NCFE.
NBV
I
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_240.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
¦
many talented refugees who need employment and who can supply RFL's
need for script writers, acters, announcers, etc. Accordingly, desk
staffing has been accomplished by examining the qualifications of duly
recommended individuals, whether the recommendations come from political
personalities or otherwise. Selection is based on the ability of the
individual to fill a need efficiently in turning out or participating
in planned programs. Recruitment is determined only by ideological
security, independence of exile politics, and personal ability,. This
is not to say that many individual exiles having decided personal con-
victions and well-known political records are not employed, but a
positive statement is made that those exile employees now produce
RFE programs reflect the policies and guidance of RFE rather than pro-
motion of partisan objectives and personalities.
B. Recruitment Detailed Procedures
--
The personnel complement of each RFE nationality desk is
founded on a hard core of dependable individuals, usually two or three
people, including the chief of the desk. "Dependability" is established
by exhaustive inquiry at all available sources to establish the desir-
ability, reliability, technical proficiency and security of the working
core of the desk. Sources used are:
(a) Exile political personalities in the United States,
(b) Exile references of high standing and known in-
partiality in the United States and Overseas,
(c) Overseas contacts and personal knowledge of our
American representative in Europe (Royall Tyler-Paris),
(d) Checks and balances of our political advisor at
Munich (W.B. Griffith),
{
.7.
-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_241.jpeg ---
14-00000
(e) British Broadcasting Corporation, where applicable,
(f) Voice of America, where applicable,
(g) Special confidential sources.
✓ These tests having been applied, confidence is plaq jin these
initial personalities, and particularly in the Desk Chief, to carry
forward recruitment of additional personnel as needed in collaboration
with the American Director of HFL (Robert E. Lang, New York) and his
associate officials. The leading personalities of each desk know what
is expected of them and since they respond to the established criteria,
the resulting full personnel complement is a group of exiles who, not-
withstanding their personal political views, are suitable and capable
program production people. They meet our basic requirement of daily
production of truly free and properly constructed propaganda broadcasts
capable of evoking the widest possible audience response in our tar, et
countries. .
In brief, the mission of RFE being conceived as a marketing
problem, the best available salesmen are procured, trained, and utilized
to sell the market.
C. Recruitment
-->
Special Security Measures
Since RFE, although a private enterprise, is by extension a
collateral instrument of American national policy, special precaution
is exercised to insure the ideological security of all employees, in-
cluding exiles. In the case of exile personnel specifically, the
-
- 8 .
:
$

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_242.jpeg ---
}
i
14-00000
1
additional approval of the Personnel Director of NCFE is required before
employment either at New York or Munich. Thus, even if a proposed
exile employee meets all the described criteria, he may not be employed
ithout this ultimate approval..
The Personnel Director of NCFE utilizes appropriate and de-
pendable sources of information to determine the acceptability of
personnel from a security standpoint. His sources are investigative in
nature and are conclusive as to the ideological record and security'
acceptability of the proposed employee. In doubtful cases the Personnel
Director consults with the Vice-President in Charge of the National
Councils Division and with the Director of Radio Free Europe. These
three officers of NCFE Jointly follow a policy of rejecting candidates
about whom there is the alightest doubt. It is to be clearly understood
that in making decisions of this kind the conflicting interests and
frantic representatiions of politically-mined exile leaders and groups
are ignored. Acceptance or rejection of candidates is wholly based on
ideological security and talent value.
D. Summary
(1) All nationality desks of RFS at New York and Munich are
staffed by individuals who have passed all tests described above.
(2) All programs produced and aired by the nationality desks
are checked and scrutinized by American supervisory personnel for ideolog-
ical content, audience acceptance and conformity to basic NCFE-FE policies.
(3) These conditions have been pro, ressively in force since
July, 1950.
9

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_244.jpeg ---
14-00000
B.
The above quotation is understood by exile personnel par-.
ticularly to be a solemn injunction against ideological program content
which in any way violates the letter and spirit of American policy and
ideals. It is a guarantee to the American people and to our captive
listeners that RFE and the men who make its programs are uncompromisingly
opposed to the Communist regines now in power in Soviet Russia and the
satellite countries.
RFE Policy Defined by Handbook (Direct Quotations)
1. The purpose of RFL is to contribute to the liberation of
the Nations imprisoned behind the Iron Curtain by sustainin; their
morale and stimulating in them a spirit of non-cooperation with the
Soviet-dominated regimes by which they are, for the time being, ruled.
2. The central characteristic of RFE is that it is the in-
strument of men who are engaped in fighting for freedom and justice.
As such, it encourages resistance to every tyrant, great and small, in
the countries it addresses. Its speakers speak -- as men of good will
who seek to contribute to the elimination of old enmities and the
building of an enduring European decocratic order.
3. As a free forum in which exiles speak to their own poeple
RFE is particularly dedicated to arguments by which exiles seek to
persuade their listeners of all devourin, ambitions of Soviet
Imperialism, the cruelty and unworkability of Communist Institutions,
- 11 -

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_245.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
F
i
and the proven advantages of the democratic way of life for the worker,
and the peasant, the administrator, and the business and professional
strata of society.
4. RFE takes counsel with exile leaders and is respectful
of their views, but its policy is not designed to further the aspira-
tions of sy single exile leader or party.
5. RFE policy is further based upon acceptance of the prin-
ciple that each of the liberated peoples shall be free to determine
for itself the political and social institutions under which it will
live once it has been liberated.
6. Finally, the following summary in the nature of a specific
limitation on program content is quoted:
"It is indispensable that all concerned grasp clearly
that RFE is a multi-national station established to
contribute to the liberation of all the peoples it
addresses, and not merely of one of those peoples.
RFE policy is therefore commanded by the limitation
that nothing may be said over its facilities to one
national audience which will destroy the confidence
in RFE of its other audiences or which is likely to
induce any of its audiences to prefer communist rule
to a liberation which might appear to promise domina-
tion by a neighboring people."
1
i
}
↑
-
· 12-'
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_243.jpeg ---
14-00000
III
RFE POLICY GUIDANCE POR PERSONNEL
A. General Comment
The programs aired by RPE are not left to whim or chance. All
programs and the personnel responsible for them are controlled by a
written policy manual. The manual sets forth in minute detail the
position and policy of FE on every topic beamed to our target countries.
The marial is the daily guidance of all employees, both American and
Exile; deviation from its rules is not permitted. Continuous scrutiny
of manuscripts and resultant broadcasts is maintained by American em-
ployees to insure that there are no deviations.
The policy manual of RFE represents the considered views of
the responsible officials, including the Board of Directors, of NCFE.
It is a statement of the principles and purposes of NCFE expressed in
operational form. It is considered and maintained as strictly con-
fidential document, but it is of course available for examination by any
proper authority.
The policy manual is in strict conformity with current American
national policies as evidenced by the following quotation from Article
One:
"As a non-povernmental radio station responsible to
the millions of American citizens who support it,
RFE cannot take a line contrary to United States
Government policy or to the beliefs of the American
people reflected in the Constitution of the United
States and in American Institutions.
- 10 -

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_246.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
-
SECURITY INFORMATION
28 April 1952
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COULDINATION
DEFUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
DEPUTY DIRECTOR CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Proposed NCFE Support on the Exile Organi:
Refugee Aid Committee in France
Izød
REFERENCE,
Letter Dated 20 March 1952 from Mare to Willa,
Enclosing 27 January 1952 Report on the Exile
Organized Refugee Aid Committes in France,
from hoger L. Hull.
1
1.
The reference, recently forwarded to us by NCFE, recommends
NCFE support for organized refugee relief committees in Paris. As
a follow-up, Mine Mary Augustine, of NCFE's New York staff, is
currently surveying refugee organizations in Western Europe. When
the results of this survey have been given to us, we plan-in
conjunction with the interested area desks-to prepare a study
with recommendations concerning the utilization of exile committees
in Europe.
2. In the meantime, the reference is forwarded for your
information.
Attachment 1
As stated above
Distributions
Adtressees - original
CIO - 1
10/TƆNIC – 1
RI - 2
-
THOMAS W. BRALEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_247.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR: KA. MEERT 1. JOYCK
SUBJECT:
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
Pature Balloon Operation
20 April 1952
1. Attached is a copy of a letter fron Min Millor in
which he suggests the necessity of coming to a definite deal-
on in respect to a future balloon operation.
2. Will you @ivise mo as to (a) whether you wish to
have a balloon operation in August or at any subsequent date,
and (b) whether you want us to set aside funds and materiala
now for a future balloon operation at some unspecified time?
•
Attacment
Ltr from Min Miller
dtd 1 Apr 52
CIO: TWB: ah
Orig & 1
->>>
Addressee
1 cc
1 cc
2 cc
->
->>>
CIO ✓
HI
10/TOXIC
MAS W. BRADIN
Chief
International Organisations Division
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_25.jpeg ---
14-00000
MRVORANDUM PURI TOPS/PY/CP0
VIA:
MARKE
SUBJECT:
CFY/OPC
SECRET
Security Information
5-2-1803
Deputy Director (Plans)
Attacks on the Soviet yth of "Prior Inventions"
1. I understand that your office has already addressed itself
to the opportunity which was offered by the increasing absurdles
of Russian claims to have beca the inventore of a list of discoveries,
omplorations, and inventions which by how comprise the bulk of such
discówrios and inventione important to vodern life. This is, of
course, an extremely vulnerable series of claims and one which
exposes itself to ridicule so readily as to render it an excellent
target for attack. There has been some play on this seen in the
American press but I feel that it would be more effective if the
Puropean press and Radio ree Europe should handle the job.
8. In the Sunday edition of the Washington lost, there was a
very good suurary of the Russian "firsts." The article was written
in just the right vein, although a more dead pan approach would
perhaps be more effective in certain places. If you do not have
this article, I suggest that you got someone to clip it for roo
as well as i recall, it is to be found in the magazine section or
the editorial (news review) part of the naver. I heard one on the
radio this morning which would fit in nicely with this general las.
I do not know the a:thor of the crack, but it is certainly a "first"
that the Russianɛ should surely be given all the credit for. The
crack was that "the äreilin was the first to put peace on a r
basis.”
001
AT/PC
Chief, M
CIC/UPC
Lorguet) FRIst §. vianta
SECRET
este ini makan
PRAZE G. WISHT

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_249.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
i
:
MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT:
i
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
14 April 1952
Gathering Evidence on Slave Labor Issue - to be presented
Ecosoc Hoarings
A. Type of evidence that is desireds
1. Scholarly studies - · Lam, administrative regulations showing
the do jure and de facto application of laws pertaining to
labor.
2. Documentary evidence
->>
Passos, identity cards, ration cards,
reloase papers, etc. Anything indicating the place, name of
camp, administrative documents, etc. Photostatic copies
accepted if the original is unavailable for retention. Seals,
stamps, and signatures desirable,
3. Tostimonial
8.
Written testimony - probably in the form of mswers to a
questionnaire. These testimonials may be withers
(1) Anonymous. (As few as possible)
(2) Authorized use of the name, either confidentially,
for release only before the court, where many sessions
will be closed to the public, or the name may be
released to the public.
b. Tape recordings
be tape recorded.
Some excellent testimonials could perhaps
0. Statistical form = The bulk of this testimonial can also
be reduced to a statistical formo
d. No hoarray testimony is wanted,
-
4. Witnesses A few of these should be presented by each group.
However, the witnesses should be most carefully chosen to in-
sure that they are really genuine, really wore in a concentra-
tion camp, andnot in somp internment or intermediate camp, and
that they spent a considerable amount of time there, without
having been convicted by due process of law. Furthermore,
these witnesses should beam of high calibor, highly literate,
capable of presenting their story clearly, and standing up to
close cross-examination, without having to alter their story.
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_248.jpeg ---
14-00000
In reply refer to W.2016
28 April 1952
Dear Spencer!
Here is a brief of the material that is wanted in
respect to the slave labor issue.
This is of great importance, as you can well imagine,
but for your information we find ourselves in something of
a box on this because having pressed for the hearings, it
is essential to gather good evidence and not be embarrassed
by something we have fought to obtain.
I hope, therefore, that you will give it your top con-
sideration and let me know if you can come up with anything.
In addition to the kinds of evidence listed here, you will
note that private organisations may testify.
Enclosures
2 Memoranda 14 Apr 52
CIO:TWB:eh
Sincerely,
Oliver E. Hadwood
Orig
-
Spencer Phenix
1 cc IO EXO.
-
1 cc - 10/TONIC
2
cc
2 cc
->>
->
CIO -
RI
see chrons for 2d endocure

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_250.jpeg ---
14-00000
KOM VRAI SKANNTOETSDA SA
;
:
i
'
SECRET
XURI IN INFORMATION
:
2 a
B. Principal targets to hit: State is especially anxious that wo assist
by roaching those parsons, and those areas hardest to reach, and on
which there exists the least evidence.
1. Individuals: The persons that present the greatest interest
are civilians, who have been in Soviet Concentration Camps
since the list war. Soldiers are considered secondary ovidence,
as with than a difference must be made and clearly dream between
PW camps, and concentration camps, where soldiers and civilians
both were put to work at hard labor. Well known persons who
have testified before should not be used. The effort must con
_ centrate on now evidence of recent date,
2. Arcas: In order to establish clearly that the concentration omp
Forms an integral part of the Soviet Commmmist political and
economic system, it is vital to prove conclusively the existence
of concentration camps in all countries which have fallen under
Soviet domination. Thus evidence in especially needed on the
following areas:
Poland
Baltic nations
East Germany
Hungary
Rumania
Bulgaria
Albania
China
N. Korea
Russia (Material on Russia, if gathered,
should be of very recent date.)
The areas in which to operate most successfully, are the followings
Sweden (Balts, Poles, Russians)
Germany (All kinds)
Trieste area (Central European refugees)
Northern Greece (Bulgarians, fummims)
Yugoslavia??? (They have evidence – will they cooperate?)
Eastern Turkey???
Iran (Reportedly, there are a good number of escapees, from
Soviet Russia. These might be Azerbaijani, Armonians,
Georgians, uven Persians, providing an entirely new
source of evidence.)
Hong Kong
Formosa (Reportedly a groups of former inmates horo)
S. Korea (N. Korean PW's, Chinese Pi's
->
might locate existence
of camps in Korea and China).
Japan (Former PW's. Some were in Siberian Slave Labor camp
C. Organisations which should do the work: These organisations need not
have any special qualifications just so long as they are bona fide
organisations. State recommends that wo try to get a diversity of
+1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_251.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
· 3 -
281
i
such organizations to present evidence.
zations would be an optimum to aim for.
Twenty different organi❤
They should represent diffor
ent interests, such as labor groups, veterms organisations, and gre
organizations, church groups, and several of them should have an
international character.
D. Your capabilities: What type of orgmizations do you have that could
organize interrogation teams, draw up lists of parsons to interview,
and go out and gather the material for presentation to the hearings?
What areas could the organizations you have in mind, work in?
What national groups could they concentrate on?
How much operational support would they require from us? (Money,
intelligence support)
How largeare their capabilitions types of material that they ca
pressat, how thoroughly can they be expected to cover the Mald
they are assigned? How many former irmates can they contact? 100?
2007 5007
Do they have U. S. State Department representatives in their areas
to which they can turn, who would assist them in complying with all
the regulations and requirements, which must be mot to be acceptedi
by the Economic and Social Council as a group shich will prosent
testizony. (It might be best if we obtained a sort of form appli
cation, which we could disseminate to the field, where necessary.)
I
The choosing of the organisation must be done at an early date.
Applications were to be in on the 31st of March, but State is
ertain that if they aresubmitted without undue delay (by mid-May)
they would be accepted,
1
¦

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_252.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECURITY Nation
DEBRET
25 April 1952
MEMGRANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Divia on
. BUBJECT:
Continuance of Iroject FJSCOPE
1. Reference is made to your memorandum of 21 April 1952
regarding the desirability of continuing Project FJSCOPE, which
provides a monthly allotment of $75.00 to Walter F. Kammerer for
services rendered to this division.
2. Although Mr. Kammerer is used as a consultant for SK, he
is called upon from time to time to furnish information outside his
capacity of consultant which wld not justify the payment of con-
sultant fee8.
3. It is felt that the montly stipend of $75.00 covers these
extre ectivities, and we should like to have Project FJSCOPE continued.
GRATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Folicy Coordination, SE
orig
to bunker
2. May reid
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_254.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2 -
SECURITY INTORina
SECRET
Accordingly, we have re-vented that to be provided with a list,
together with my available information regarding the political
orientation and plans for the future, of the estimated 25 to 40
stucients who expect to complete their sondemie vark at the end
of the current University year. When this list is available
wo shall transmit the information to you.
Distributions
TILMAS V, ISAIEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Addresses – Original & 6
610 - 1
TO/DOTO -
10/BST - 1 (Icegiven namey)
RI - 2
CIO/NBV:bw
SECRET
1
:
I
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_253.jpeg ---
14-00000
24 April 1952
KISMAFUUM FIR, CHIEF LANTERN EUROPA
ATTENTION,
GUR:CT
FLEIKENCH.s
Mr. O'Meara
Future of Strasbourg Free Europe University Students
6/10 Kemorandum to C/2 of 2) Kurch 1952,
Sero Subject as Above,
1. There are attached heret, lists of stuurts, together
with biographical data, of the Free Europe University, accord-
ing to the national groups of your interest (Crechoslovakia,
istonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and thungary), as submitted
to us on 14 April 1952.
2. When this information was given to us the following
egyest acoan, anied it,
"You realize that the families of cost of there
students are in most vulnerable positions behind the
Iron Curtain and the information we secured from them
se promised to keep atristly confidential. Of course,
some of the caces can be camouflaged for public
consus tion but we have to keep faith with there
Joungsters and for that reason names can not be
identified with even akeleton artlines of their servers
3.
The individual responsible for the administration of the
Free Zurope University has explained to us that,
"The date of the completion of their studies in each
case is impossible to furnish with any securacy for the
simple reason that Franch university courses are not
arranged with the sare exactness that sharecterises the
custom of American colleges and universities. On this
point I am give you two hits of information. First,
that in no case is it exṛected that my student would
continue as a member of the Collage de l'Europe Libra
for more than a maximum of three years. Also, of the
present student body it is orested that 25-40 will finish
their academio work at the University of berasbourg at the
and of the current university year."
SECRET
4

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_255.jpeg ---
14-00000
424
ww
SECRET
24 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Qief, Contact Division, 00
SUBJECT:
Your Newerandu 29 February 1952 on "Hungarian
Exile Activi tes"
I was interested in year report on Hagy and his efforts to
set up a Hungarian Government-in-Exile. I note in paragraph 5
that you say your cantaes is hoping to receive moro information
from them. Since I think this situation has been cleared up by
other events, I would not want you to press your contact to stir
Nagy to further action by a request for more information. If,
however, Hagy does give you more information, we should vary mich
like to see it.
MO:TWB/eh
Orig
-
1 e
->>
Addressee
COD/OPC
1 00 - IO/DHC
CIO
2 cc - HI
THOMAS W. FRADEN
Chief
International Orgard sations Division

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_257.jpeg ---
14-00000
ECRET
:
certain they could not be. No statement mado by HỢP, no line of
policy that k7% could pursue, no suggestion or propaganda line that
17 could follow erald be done in the naso of the National Council
co long as the members of each buncil are inempable of reaching a
temp decision or of reselling; a majority dealsion wilch the minority
would not attest to sulvori. It mean to so that there la only
historical value in talking ist the original concept of to
out
National Councile 5:. The oxcept has changed, and the Gange was
necabrary la corragioni to the fuob. The fact is the inability of
each tational Council to as a single volts.
h. Without further discution, Wamfore, I an umprapasod to
auk ni to anke a major to Holley much as the Stats
Derartsent papar 5. 1 uniorstand that you and Ir. traden
have speed with Adinda pod dr. Ling to disuse this proble
thoroughly with the poonde who she connamed in the State Department
and i hope that after these discussions we may reach an agrescant on
the matters which the paper ralna.
CIC: Tab/oh
(24 Apr 52)
Orig & L
200
1 co
1 ca
100
1 co
1 00
200
-> Addressce
•
-
-
-
N.R. (1 for BR/1 )
ADA C
CIO
10/MNIC
DT/026
SD/CFC
KI
SECRET
PHATE E NER
1
:
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_256.jpeg ---
14-00000
7745
.
UN FORT
8.1. JOT
Tolicy lenging taff
.
Department of state
stato Departmenɩ i mør on "The functions of WCHE.
and NTPA
1. Thank you for forwarding to us the state Department s013-
randma se the functions of E and R. 1 za sorry that there
has been a dalay in replying to it. The chief reason has been
our effort to obtain a written statement of position from the 2072
SXDĽA LĪVU board, and particularly from Robert Lang, the tractor
ot kvt. After long considering the ratter, ‚M13, has a rested &
desire to talk permanally uita you about the subject, and I under-
stand that since the elapsed tho he has had one opportunity for a
conferase 11th up on the problem. 1 acree with the view you
exɔmsted to him - that thore ought to be further conferences
but nevertheless want you to know our own views without further
delay.
2. I think that there is a basic element of al munier. Ganding
in the State Department paper. That is the idea wian costo me
to be implicit in it that te ndles do not broadcast. In fact,
the dies do all the broadcasting. By and large, then men are not
politiani figures bet legalcians, writers end navemen having m
that kia soms training and point of view as those who do dellar
work for krican companies. Pro juantly, also, die leaders from
within the National outils are asked to make porconal troldcaste.
Die practies will continue. all in all, to great is us exila
domina lána of t broadcasts List in many instances thece brow!oaste
have token on the town and coloration of indigeaus radio in the
asuntries to which they are alred. Wherever poable, that is the
aim of aết - to compete within each country as sa indigenous national
station
•
3. In chillian, even allowing, however, for this råsunderstand-
ing, as i baileve it to lo, the Late @parvient paper preseita a
point of viewed in mich 1 emot agroe. Tip in that the Fabienal
Councils could in practica to placed in charge of HPS. I am almost

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_258.jpeg ---
14-00000
JEM CARDUZ P Pr. Robert 1. Joyes
Toli lanning taff
reputant of Cate
Testimg of Adelph, barle, Jr.
on behalf a higolas slam
1. Thank you for your menor. of 14 March 1952
transmitting to us Rr. Con ball's memorandum of 13 March
regardier the testimary of Adolph A. barle Jr. on behalf
af Micolze tileza. This is to inform you that were in
carlete a reement with the very which you and
Mr. Campbell have expressed.
2. Yo feel that it is indeed not regrettal le that
Mr. Berle in bis tentiveny mai certain resaria offensive
to the Cratis grop. In Parch, tr, drow
received br, Cretaland in an astept to disclaim any
Monsibility on the forr. Berle's
statements and also to male fr. Cretsianu that ifr. Berle
had moke in a private carcity and as attorney to
Fr. Relama. This interview was followed by a letter from
Mr, fray to *. Crotala a on 26 March, in which these sare
views wore art forth.
3. Ve shall are a serious attort to prevent the
comience of sich incinte in the future, we are returning
your file sa you requorBAJ,
Thalasure
CIO/T\m/ Vials (17/h, re-typed 21/4)
Metributions
Orig 4 1 - Areas
1 - CIO
10 10/DUTO
1-AFC
1-18
2 - RI
47
i
TNA: W. BRATEN

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_259.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
t
f
15
NEV
Willes told me this am
the Cretan sent a city of this
Testiming to Im Grew Together
1 with a lette
inquering
"four come?"-
Gem & air lunched yesterday
+ agreept 167 Berke was way off
face and brew is preparing
Letter to Getgram telling him the
Belle had no night to attach C.
drift
as he did; a copy of this lettin
will
So to Beule from to mailing
for his comments.
as aws put it to me.
d
· It
in the confes & theres withing.
us to do about it at this tim
35°
[have infestime the atomve]
Ay Home
mre
-
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
In reply refer
tos -1592 W-1904
128 March 1952
1
Dear Toms
with reference to the stephen Hainesyk case which can discussed
with you during your recent visit, several questions have arisen
concerning the broader aspects of the type of activity Mainczyk was
undertaking in addition to his PFE duties.
Specifically, we would like to know what sort of employment
contract RFF employees enter into with RFF. If possible, we would
like a copy of a tyrical contr et. We are interested in knowing
what restrictions, if any, are placed on employees' outside interests
or activities while employed with RV, particularly as they would
apply to a case such as Mainesyk's. le would also like to have
information on the type of security arreement presently in use
between RFF and its employees,
There are attached several rapers bearing on the Mainczyk case,
forwarded with a report on the matter, which was prepared for our
friends across the street. This report was to the general efect
that the American manager of the Salsburg office of Radio Free
Europe has been deeply concerned over events arising from Mainesyk's
recent death. While loskin through the personal effects of the
deceased, he found evidence that Maincayk had acce-ted money for
the purpose of assisting individuals to escare from behind the Iron
Curtain to the U.3.7one of Austria. The Rif manager was further
disturosd to find that the entrusted funds were not listed among the
assets of the deceased or derosited with the American Express
Company at Salsburg.
}
Sincerely,
+ C
Three enclosures
CIO/NEV¡blj
Distribution:
Orig
2 - RI
1 -
- Addresses
PY/Ex Asst
1-0102
donth
1102
Umilies

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_262.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
44
of
Mr. Bradens
i
17 March
This is another example of interference and partiality on the part of NCFE.
Mr. Berle had 1) no right in testifying in this case and 2) no business endorsing
the Radescu faction as against the Cretzianu-Visoianu Group.
Major Fishburn would like the document back today, room 1201 J.´
Ellen
Į
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_261.jpeg ---
14-00000
is
represent us policy and is
generally very
Ped
-
What
needed is:
appears
a) High-level rapping of
Berle's knuckles
b)
Official denial or
NC7E denial
this as NC7E positions.
P.S. Berle is
Malaxa
as a
wrong
in identifying
partisan of
Radesca
Mury

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_260.jpeg ---
14-00000
1' March 52
Mr. Fishburne C/SE/PC5
X 3091, X 495 brought this
"in today: He said that the
DD/P is concerned about it.
not is, but called
Ellen was not
in at 5 and
was
to Mr Fishburne.
a crook and an
transferred
Mr. Fishburne stated that
Malaxa is a Rumanian, industrialist,
an opportunist, who
cooperated with the Communists
and supported the Nazis (and 9080
files is in frogress and will be in
Thr. Fishburne's hands.) Berle's
unilateral action (identifying
NC7E inth this cause) invoties a
violistate policy, will stir
up
the
evites who will think this does

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_264.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
SECRET
SECURITY INTERNATION
In reply refer toi W-2003
18 April 1952
Dear Mini
When you wore here Wednesday, you handed me a letter
from Michael E. Thompson about General Hannyey.
I have looked into this and find that Thompson
promised on his last trip to Washington that he would give
us certain facts about Hennyey's new visa application which
were necessary when the old visa application expired on
21 March. We never have received these facts from Thompson.
-
Will you kindly, therefore, ask Thompson to get together
for you the facts on the new visa application
its number,
where it was mado, etc. and we will go ahead and act as
we said we would. We can't act without them.
:
CORTWB/Sh
Orig
1 cc
->>>
-
2 00 -
2 cc -
Addressee
10/Exec off.
CIO
HI
Sincerely,
TWE Mentioned above to Adm. Miller by
telephone on 17 Apr 52.
ch
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_263.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
MAR 20 1952
2-7043
MEMORANDUM FOR:
PRONa
SUBJECT:
Chief, International Organisations Division
Deputy Director (Plans)
Testimony of Adolph A. Berle, Jr., on behalf of
Nicolae Malaxa; Complaint of the State Department.
1. Please note the attached memoranda from Bob Joyce and John
Campbell, dated March 14 and Parch 13, respectively. Will you please
prepare a brief memorandum for Messrs. Joyce and Campbell informing-
them that we are in complete agreement with their views concerning
Adolph Berle's statements, and moreover that action has been taken to
inform the Cretaianu-Visoianu group that *T. Eerle had no right what-
soever to make remarks of this kind in his capacity as a member of the
Board of NCFF. You can obtain the details of what has been said from
Mr. Grow and Mr. Dulles in order to strengthen and round out your nam-
orandum to Masers. Joyce and Campbell. (It is my understanding that
Mr. Crew received Mr. Cretsianu for the purpose of denying any responsi-
bility on the part of NCF: for Mr. Perle's remarks, which he made in
his private capacity and incidentally as attorney for Malaxa.) will
you please let tr. Horton see the memorandum which you write to Messrs.
Joyee and Campbell.
2. For your information, I have recently been informed by a very
knowledgeable Rumanian that, in his opinion, some good has resoltød
out of this highly improper and messy business of Herle's. This Merle
attack on Cretsianu was partially responsible, in the judgment of ay
informant, for Cretaianu's sudden turn-about and agreement to shake
hands with and sit down beside Hassrs. Cafencu and Davila. "It's an
ill wind …..”, etc.
Although the following question may not be entirely in your field,
I should appreciate your getting up a statement for my information con-
cerning the present status of and our proposed future use, if any, of
Julius Fleischmann. I have just heard throgh the grapevine that he
considers his usefulness to us at an end and that he is severing all
connection with this Agency. This disturbs me, as I consider it.
Fleischmann to be an intelligent and able man who has already gained
enough experience in our line of endeavor to be of valus to us.
information is by any chance correct, then I do not understand why we
so lightly cast him aside. I hope that I am wrong and that he may be
Bevering official connections only to continue his work in a more subtle
manner.
&DFC
c/ss
(Signed), FRANK 6. Widnau
SECRET Frank O. Wimer.
17
Soculty mat in
Attachment: Described manorama and transcript of Ferle
testimony.
If my
I
i
A
S

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_265.jpeg ---
14-00000-
i
:
i
{
April 15, 1952
:
:
I
Dear Oliver:
When I last saw you, I spoke of the General
Hennyey matter explaining the great importance that
the Fund places on expediting the arrival of General
Honnyoy in this country for Fund purposes. I later
mentioned this matter in detail to one of your liaison
associates who has these matters in hand. I explained
that it is considered imperative that all possible as-
sistance be developed looking toward the sponsored ar-
rival of General Hennyey in the shortest possible time.
I now refer you to our letter of March 2, 1952, which I
delivered in person to Mr. Abramson. That letter con-
tains all of the necessary data for action in the case.
We have just been informed that the unconscionable
delay in the processing and approval of General Hennyey's
entry presently will be made the subject of public pro-
test by elements of the Hungarian National Council.
The details of this situation will be more fully explain-
cd by Leonard L. Stamm who will hand you this letter.
For your convenience, I am attaching a copy of our
letter of March 2 above cited, and I would further state
that we believe that extraordinary action should be
taken to affect the immediate processing of General
Hennyey by entry permit or otherwise. Our representa-
tives in Munich are in daily contact with General
Hennyey and can be of particular assistance in the event
you desire to use extraordinary means to expedite his
departure for the United States.
Sincerely,
Michael & Thompson
1
:
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_267.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
Adm. Kuller
%
notes:
w
Liason associate in
Bill Knott, alien
Contral Chief
Security Branch.
2. 92:
Bela Fabian of the
hase Nah. Count
in about to write a
rough letter to the
My Times.
1
Ther
1866 à aim
Alt
1
!

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_266.jpeg ---
14-00000
FRACTAL.
COPY.
March 2, 1952
1
L
Dear Mr. Ninett:
General Gusztav Hennyey is Representative of the Hungarian National
Council in Western Germany and a person in whom the Fund places trust and
confidence in its dealings with the problems of the Hungarian National
Council. The Fund has been desirovs for sonu time that General Henrycy
come to the United States, and believes that his visit here would be most
helpful to the present activities and future of the Hungarian National
Council.
An opportunity presented itself last fall for General Hennyey to
emigrate to the United States as a displaced person. He was granted a
visa by the Consul General in Munich on November 21, 1951, EC Number 256411,
D.P. Commission Validation Number A-7037, Sponsor Mr. Louis Rado, 182 Kain
Street, Poughkeepsie, New York. Subsequent to the issuance of his visa
his file was sent by the local representative of the U. S. Immigration
and Naturalization Services in Munich to the Office of the Attorney Gen-
eral in Washington for special consideration under No. 3-CFR 17557.
Neither General Hennyey nor the National Council have been able to deter
mine why his case has been held in suspense, by the Immigration and Natur-
alization Service. Indeed, in response to one inquiry General Hennyey
was told that the file in question had been lost. As stated above, the
Fund attaches great importance to General Hennyey's visit to the United
States, and considers this visit to be of high operational importance,
since it will deeply affect the work of the Hungarian National Council.
We shall be very grateful for any assistance which you can render in the
expedition of the decision of the Immigration and Naturalisation Service.
I may add that General Hennyey's visa will expire on the 21st of this
month, and he also will lose his rights owing to the expiration of the
Displaced Persons Act in the near future should he not be able to emigrate
promptly.
:
:
1
Sincerely yours,
}
1
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_269.jpeg ---
14-00000
E
17
:
MZAKJENDUM FOR:
SUBSECT:
SECRE!...
28530
17 April 1952
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Proposed Conference at Princeton Inn
'
Ion asked me to remind you of Admiral Miller's request
that you speak to David Eruce about his attendance at Admiral
Killer's proposed conference at the Princeton Inn on Saturday,
10 May at 10:30 AM. You will recall Admiral Miller's mention
of the fact that the idea of the conference is attributed to
Mr. Bruce, dating back to a luncheon conversation that he had
in Faris with C. D. Jackson and the Admiral.
10:33/en
Oriz
2 cc
-
-
2 cc -
DDCI
CIO
21
Tour Braden
THOMAS W. PRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_27.jpeg ---
14-00000
-4
A
American Consulate
Munich
'
SENTY
COFY
January 21, 1952
Germany
Gentlemens
The undersigned, Dr. Fola Gyorky of 21 Fast 92nd Street, New York
City and Mr. Alexander A. Back of the above address wish to request
your assistance in connection with consequences resulting from the
sudden death of Mr. Steven W. Mainesyk of Radio Free Europe in
Salzburg, Austria.
The said gentleman was holding our money as a trustee, which
money was sent to his to be paid out under certain conditions; we
were trying to save our fa-ily from behind the Iron Curtain and we
were negotiating with different people who were willing to undertake
this task and we needed someone who would pay these persons the agreed
amount in question when the operation was properly concluded,
Through the sad rentieran's secretary re received word that Mr.
Mainczyk was seriously 111 for the past few months and suddenly
passed away, and to make certain that our interests are properly
protected we are taring the liberty of writing you this letter in
connection with the above matter,
The total amount sent to ANFXCO, Calsburg was $3,800. - out of which
Mr. Fainesyk paid altogether $300. - thus learing $3,500. - in
Kr. Þainez;k's name. Of course, if it is necessary to vou d both
be glad to furnish additi nal proof to support this present letter
and we would greatly appreciste y mr kind assistance, he would
also thank you to advise us as to wh. t additional stops you deam it
necessary for us to take in this matter.
We thank you in advance for your kind assistance and cou teay and
remain
AAB/mak
Very truly yours,
Alexander A. Back
Dr. Bela Gyorky
;

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_270.jpeg ---
14-00000
17+
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET
17 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
DEPUTY CHIEF, SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE
Bulgarian National Committee
1
1. This is to confirm our oral report to you of the
President of NCFL's report to us of his 15 April 1952
conference with Dimitrov on this subject.
2. Admiral Miller reported that he had presented the
agreed upon plan to Dimitrov, without threatening to out
off funds. Dimitrov's first reaction was that the plan
was a maneuver to oust Dimitrov. The end result, however,
was that Dimitrov was to think the plan over and give his
views on it in return. It was further suggested that a
council meeting would be held on 30 April or as soon there-
after as possible. However, Amiral Miller stated that
this meeting would probably not occur before mid-May, since
the two members coming from Paris would probably not arrive
before that time. A quorum would not be possible without
them.
CIO/NEV:bw
Distributions
Addressee
CIO - 1
IO/DOTO
-> 1
-
original
10/Ex.Asst. - 1
RI - 2
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET
}
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_268.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
17 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Crusade for Freedom
1. At a meeting in John Devine's office at noon on 16 April
at which were present Messrs. Devine, Smith, Lang, Lambie, Braden
and Admiral Miller, Mr. Smith presented the program for the Crusade
for Freedom for next year, which I attach. The budget estimate is
just over $500,000 and the central idea is to campaign across the
nation for signatures and dimes on behalf of a pledge to preserve,
maintain and spread freedom.
2. There are other ideas connected with this, namely a freedom
train which will carry the scroll and dimes of the people of the
United States from point to point and which eventually will come to
Washington where the signatures attached to the scroll will be
presented to the new Congress and the new Fresident. Essentially,
however, and in terms of our relations idth the State Department,
the program is intended to avoid specific mention of what the money
is being raised for; thus, for example, there will be no publicity
about what transmitters cost and how important it is to raise the
money. Instead, the campaign will be kept very general and RFZ-HFA
and VOA adll be mentioned only incidentally as one means of spreading
the idea of freedom.
3. Mr. Devine presented the program to Messrs. Sargeant, Kohler
and Compton and received their approval. I have therefore notified
Admiral Filler that there is no objection on behalf of the State
Department to the plan presented for the 1953 Crusade for Freedom.
Attachment
Program for Crusade
CO:TWB/ch
Orig
->>>
1 oc -
100
EDC (thru DD/P)
ADPC
DEIC
✓
TIONAS W. BRADEN
Cites
International Organizations Divison
88
ag
SECRET
&
1
3
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_273.jpeg ---
14-00000
-3-
Sunden
1. Savist Propaganda in Quoden
Comment: This report is also a duplicate. (See preceding
-
original
Distributions
Addressce
435 - . 1
15/50 -1
EE/FC 1
-
SE - 1
CIO - 1
IQ/DOTO - 1
RI -
2
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
1
i
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_271.jpeg ---
14-00000
Note to DDCI: I just talked to Min Miller about the Dennen situation. He would
like to withdraw his objections to his evert use of Dennen.
:
17 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FORS
SUBJECT:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR CENTRAL INTELLI GANCE
Reports of Leon Dannen
1.9
1. Almost without exception, the Dannen reports, of which
thirteen have been examined to date, duplicate reports already
received, but do not contain as much information as the reports
being obtained from other sources or from the same sources as
those used by Dennen. Of the reports, only one has been
disseminated. The Department of State's comment on that report
vas that a similar one had been received.
2. For your convenience, a brief analysis of the thirteen
reports is presented belows
Hungary
1. Ceepl Arsenal in IhmeeKY
Comments
This report, consisting of a list of names of
directors or top officials in various lungarian
industrial enterprises, was considered of
marginal value. The persons listed ware
identified with overt positions and have been
mentioned in a mumber of overt Hungarian
publications,
2. Report on the Activiting of the Buncarian Erkasar and
Consulate in Pario.
3. Report on Hungarian focialist Group in Exence.
4.
Comments
Information is thin and overt. These reports
duplicate in part reports already received in
greater detail.
This material probably comes from persons
who have contact or knowledge of the hungarian
Legation, but who have not actually "penetrated"
the Logation.
Burvey of Enlitical Conditions in Hungary, Ixon 1951 through
the larly fark of 1956.
Comments Frankly overt material, obtained (or could have
been obtained) from a close reading of published
material. Of marginal value as representing the
viewpoints of former thungarian industrialists.
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_272.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
1
2 -
5. Hungery'a Froductive Carscity in Relation to Hungarian
Plan for 1952.
Comments Report was thin. Information on mines and
factories was already known.
Overall Comments Continuation of reports similar to the above
is not recommended.
Poland
1. Blish Industry Gears for Lar Iroduction.
2.
3.
Polish Coal Production.
Foland is inexaring Reserve Industrial Staff with Knowledge
of languages.
4. Report on folard.
A
Comment on the / reportas
"
Most, if not all of this information, had been previously
received through our regular channels.
The material is not disseminated to customer
agencies who have overt access thereto.
5. WIN Report
Comments A verbatim extract (42 pages) of a 100 page report
which we had already received. (In this connection,
please note CEE's memorandum of 28 January 1952,
which is attached).
Rumania
1. Indancy Cadre School in Rucharest
Comment: Evaluation here F3. Evaluation by State A2, bert
State had previously received the information.
Estonia
1.
Elections of People's Judges and Lay Aspersora in Estonia.
2. Some More Important Develoments in Soviet Latonia in 1951.
Comments
These reports duplicate information we have received.
This is true, primarily because Johannes Mikhelson
is the source. Mikhelson is a WK-1 agent, is also
used by Mr. Angleton, and is on annan's ICFTU-in-
exile payroll,
SEGRET
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_275.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
}
1
1
1
MUNITY INFTRUATION
SECRET
In reply refer to: W-1899
S
16 April 1952
Dear Mins
•
We have a 2 April report from our friends across the
street documenting certain criticisms which Mr. Visoiam
has made of NCFE. Some of this criticism stema directly,
I believe, from his reaction to Mr. Ferla's testimony in
the Malaxa case. Another of his complaints stems from the
appointment of Comarniciu to a position with the Free Europe
University at Strasbourg.
This report raises several questions with me. I should
consider it a great favor if you would have prepared for no a
review of the whole Rumanian National Committee as to factions,
alignments and with recommendations regarding what might be
done to improve the Rumanian Committes.
CIO/NBV:bw
Distributions
Addressee
CIO - 1
->>
original
10/Admin. Off.
10/DOTO - 1-
RI - 2
-
1
Sincerely,
Oliver Radwood
i
SECRET
LABE

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_278.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
!
}
}
In reply refer to W-1984
*15 April 1752
Dear Mins
One of your employees, Miron Eutarin, prior to
accepting employment with your firm, was interviewed
by us. with your permission we should like to continue
procesaing papers for his employment. If you wish to
keep him, we should like to know that so that u can
close out the case.
Sincerely,
CIO: NEV/ah
Orig Addressee
2 co - CIO
1 co -
2 00
-
10/Ex.off.
RI
Oliver E. Badwood
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_274.jpeg ---
14-00000
7 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Leon Dennen
1. He provided for Ison Dennen $71,000 for the period 1 August
1951 to 30 June 1952 for a project to be operated by NCFE in Europe.
(Dennon did not, as I understand it, assume his work in iuropa until
c. 1 October 1951.) The $71,000 included an allotment of $6,000 for
ten monthly payments of $600.00 for special intelligence activities.
Otis recently informed us, however, that of the $600.00 per month
allotments, Dennen had asked for and received a total of only $250.00
all told.
2. On 2 April, Admiral Miller stated that Dennen's work was
absolutely worthless as far as NCFE and RFL ware concerned.
Dennan's intelligence reports have been evaluated as having
practically no usefulness; and, as you know, in his intelligence
"gathering", he has crossed some of Ha's vires. In both OPC and
050, there is such suspicion of Dennen, that no one has been willing
to give him direct guidance for foar that it would marely enlargo
Dannan's knowledge of our operations.
3. When Dennen returns, my recommendation is that we tell him
that while we may discontinue support to the International Confederation
of Free Trade Unionists in Exile, we feel that, since we have a Paris
NCFE representative, we should use this channel-or some other channel
not involving additional expense.
4. Meanwhile, sinos the ICFTU in exile is of primary interest
to E, and of some interest to SE and WE, I have asked Mr. Brose, Mr.
Horton, and Hr. Scott their views on continued support to the organization
and, after a go-round with them, I will send up a further report to you.
CIO/KEY.bw
Distributions
Addressce
C: - 1
->
10/DUTO - ✓
RI - 2
original
THOMAS W. ERADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_277.jpeg ---
14-00000
! :
In reply refer to: W-1970
15 April 1952
:
Dear Mini
Looking through the recently inherited files, I notice
For
a special fund which has its origin in the Foole era.
the present fiscal year $10,000 has been drawn and accounted
for, as a John Waterfield accounting statement dated 27 Janu-
ary 1952 indicates, You will note there is a cash balanca
as of 27 January of $5,578.
.
This is one of those things that questions will always
be raised about. I know there is good precedent for it,
however, in business firms and maybe wa ahould cɔntinue it.
In any event, I wanted to bring it to your attention and to
be sure you knew of its existence.
CIO:TWB/ah
Orig
-
1 cc -
Addressee
10/Exosf.
2 cc - CIO✓
2 cc -
RI
--
Sincerely,
Oliver F. Hadwood
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_279.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
COPY
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (chock mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry,
FROM:
2.
2.
CIO
DD/P
TO
SE/PC
DATE
ROOM
NO
H&C D
FWO'D
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
12
Apr
TWB
16
CVH
Apr
CDOB
TWB
NO.
DATE
10 apr
52
COMMENTS
Forwarded per your request of
2 April 1952.
TWB
ADPC
CO
SE/PC Mr. Watson
Mrs. Bailey
7.
per NBV
-
Noted I hope we have heard the
last of complaints about this lovely
handled affair from RFE, NCFE,
Embassy Attache etc. etc. etc.
I regret what I have said before -
it is wrong for us to try to use NCFB
RFE as cover for covert opr.
FGW
12 April 52
10.
11.
12.
14.
15.
OCTABLAT PERS
FOR 4950
FORM NO. 51-10
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_276.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
April 2, 1952
Mr. Visoiam called at his roquest to inform us of the high
lights of his recent trip to Europe. Ho had first attended the
meeting of the Eastern European Section of the European Movement
in London, then visited France, Germany and Italy.
Mr. Vinoiam said that in Germany ho had talked with Chancellor
Adenauer, Secretary of State Hallstein, and other officials of the
Bonn Government, as well as with Mr. Rober and other Allied officials,
He said that the Germans were rympathetic to his discussion of
kumanian affairs and showed some interest in the problems of Eastern
Europe. They, emphasized, however, that Germany's present position
did not enable them to speak in terms of any positive policy at this
time. Mr. Visoiamm got the impression that the Germans were now, and
would be in the future, even more actively interested in Rumania
and other Eastern European countries than were France and Italy.
Mr. Visoianu felt that F. ance had completely abdicated its position
in Eastern Europe and was entiroly wrapped up in its own domestio
problems and relations with Germany.
Hr. Visolarm also discussed in Germany the cuestion of Rumanian
refugees there (most of whom are Iron Guardists) and of the rather
large community of Volksdeutsche who came to Germany from Rumania at
the close of the war. He said that the Gorman authorities would
like to have this group returned to Rumania at such time as the
country might be liberated, both because they contributed to Germany's
over-population problem and because they would represent, as they
have in the past, a possible instrument for German policy in Humania.
As a Rumanian, Mr. Vicolamu was not over anxious to add to the mmbers
of the German minority but felt that a free Fumanian Government would
not deny the right of return to those who wished to ɖɔ so.
Mr. Visoiam talked at length with Mr. Tyler in Paris. Ho
retains his distrust and dislike of the NCFE, which to saye can never
assist effectively in bringing about unity in the Aussian emigration
since it supports one group 100% and persecutes the other group 100%.
Es vas particularly incensed about Mr. Barla's recant intervention in
the Halax case. He said that he regarded the situation as having very
serious inplications not only for the emigres lut also for the future
of the country itself. He denounced hadescu's conduct, giving
numerous examples, as detrimental to the true interest of Rumania. One
of his more specific complaints against the NCFL was the appointment
of Comarniciu as head tutor (or some such title) at the Free Muropa
University in Strasbourg. He said that Comarniciu ha; nɔ education
and no qualifications for the post but was there merely because he was
of the Radescu faction which NCFE favored,
Kr. Visoiam saw King Michael in England but he did not indicate
whether there were any now developments with respect to the King's
position toward the present disunity in the Humanian emigration,
1
}

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_28.jpeg ---
14-00000
5-
SIGNET
BACK FIPORT & IMPORT CO.
215 Fourth Avenue
New York 3, N.Y., U.S.".
Member of Commerce & Industry
Association of New York
COPY
Cable Address
"Backexport"
Telephone
Orchard 4-5507
January 22, 1952
American Consulate
Calzburg
Austria
Gentlemons
Le just received the following cable from Dr. Emi Ehm, secretary
of the deceased Hr. Steven Mainzcykı¬
*YADIZZYK DIED INTESTATE SEFECTS IN CUSTODY OF AMERICAN CONSULATE
- ALZHING SUGGEST CONTACT THEM LETTER FOLIOWING. DH, EMI IHM”
It so happens that yesterday we erroneously wrote to the American
Consulate in Munich, Germany and we are enclosing herewith a copy
of the said letter from which you 11 see all particulars of our
problez.
Your prompt attention and kind assistance in this matter will be
greatly appreciated.
Very truly yours,
Alexander A Back
Dr. Dela Gyorky
A&E/rak
L

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_280.jpeg ---
i
14-00000
:
$
->
thi
*
F
"Tom:
10 April
10
I think if
Avere
I would
forward This the
forwarThis
DD/P with a note
on cover sheet:
Forwarded per
your request for
April 19538
JWB
done 12 apr
ch
note para 10. HGW will
Untwistard the main teruble.
n.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_283.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Distribution:
Addresses – Orig. & 1
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
•
:
}
I
!
:
SECHE!

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_281.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGNET
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
SUBJECT:
Honry Landowski
1
10 APP MO
1. Attached is a detailed summary of the events surrounding the
attempted utilisation by Ope of Henry Landowski as a contract agent in
Athens. Landovski vas stationed in Athens by S3/PC with the cover of a
journalist under contract with RFE to provide that organization with newe
of refugees coming into Greece from certain countries. Landowski was not
integrated into RFE; he was associated with R&B under a contractual arrange-
ment meant to provide him with a reasonable, explanation for his income and
office.
2. The relationship was not a successful one for several reasons:
A. Landowski himself was poorly suited for the assignment, and
did not bring the necessary experience and skill required to maintain
smooth working relations with RFE.
b. The Landowski assignment was not, in fact, compatible with
RFB's decision to station a regular staff officer of its own in
Atheus. Since the functions of the two men appeared to overlap to
an unreasonable degree, both were put in an awkward position.
RFE is not organised or designed to maintain covert relation-
ships with contract agents notionally associated with it.
d. The liaison between CIA/ope and RFE was not, during the period
under consideration, fully satisfactory in this instance. Quite minor
problems became serious because of a lack of complete understanding
between the two organisations.
3. This division concludes from the case that neither RFB nor (b5
inference) its parent, NCFE, is suitable for use as a cover instrument.
An agent under cover is seen in the Landowski instance as raising staffing
and organisational problems RFE has not been set up to handle. Because of
the unsuitability of the arrangement, and because of the security risks
involved, Landowaki is being recalled from Athans, and will be disposed of
as securely as possible.
Attach: (1)
1. As stated in para. 1
Distributions (See Dr. 2)
GRAFIAN N. YATSEVITCH
Chief for Policy Coordination,
SECREI
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_285.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
Store!
SECURITY INMAMatimy
obtaining AFB's cooperation. Mr. Thompson later informed this division
that a Mr. Phenix of HFS agreed to the contractual relationship proposal,
but vished it made clear that RFB would not give cover to Landovski in the
guise of a regular RFB employee. This was understood and agreed to by this
office.
4. During Landowski's covert training in Washington, in July and
August, the Commercial Division was consulted regarding the various aspects
of creating a fictitious corporation, Burepe News Service, along the lines
outlined above. The difficulties of legal incorporation and of maintaining
plausible US headquarters for such a firm, according to the Commercial
Division, made this inadvisable. It was therefore decided, after consulta-
tion with the Legal Division, that a personal contract between Landowski,
supposedly representing the "Europe News Service," and RFE would be sufficient
and would obviate the risks of building a cover firm out of nothing.
Mr.
5. During a drief conversation between Mr. Lang of RFE and H/PC's
case officer for the Landovski matter, the following points were covered;
Mr. Lang was particularly interested in whether Landowaki could actually
provide useful material to RFX, and was told that this was the case.
Lang said the desired contract could be arranged merely by his requesting
it at an Executive Committee meeting of NCFR. In answer to an inquiry,
Lang said no standard RFE contract form oxisted, but that in drawing the
Landowski contract he would use the noncommittal phrasing of the RFM/Free
Federation of Journaliste contract, in which a definite monthly payment vas
stipulated without any mention of specific returns from F7J (which, Mr. Lang
said, is a subsidi od organisation). He ma reassuring as to whether RFB's
accounting mechanism
Ulunci
G

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_282.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
SUBJECT:
Henry Landowski
10 APR 192
1. Attached is a detailed summary of the events surrounding the
attempted utilisation by Ope of Henry Landowski as a contract agent in
Athens. Landowski was stationed in Athons by S8/PC with the cover of a
Journalist under contract with RFE to provide that organisation with neve
of refugees coming into Greece from certain countries. Landowski vas not
integrated into RFE; he was associated with RB under a contractual arrange-
ment meant to provide him with a reasonable explanation for his income and
office.
2. The relationship was not a successful one for several reasons:
8.
Landowski himself was poorly suited for the assignment, and
did not bring the necessary experience and skill required to maintain
smooth working relations with RFB.
b. The Landowaki assignment was not, in fact, compatible with
RIE's decision to station a regular staff officer of its own in
Athens. Since the functions of the two men appeared to overlap to
an unreasonable degree, both were put in an awkward position.
8. RFE is not organized or designed to maintain covert relation-
ships with contract agents notionally associated with it.
d. The liaison between CIA/ope and HFE was not, during the period
under consideration, fully satisfactory in this instance. Quite minor
problems became serious because of a lack of complete understanding
between the two organisations.
3. This division concludes from the case that neither RFA nor (by
inference) its parent, NCFE, is suitable for use as a cover instrument.
An agent under cover is seen in the landowski instance as raising staffing
and organizational problems RVE has not been set up to handle. Because of
the unsuitability of the arrangement, and because of the security risks
involved, Landowski is being recalled from Athens, and will be disposed of
as securely as possible.
i
Attach: (1)
1. As stated in para. 1
Distribution: (See Dr. 2)
GRATIAN M. YARJEVITCH
Chief for Policy Coordination, &
Stuhri
i
4

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_287.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
For
I
SECRET
7. While Landowski was in New York, the BB/PC case officer was informed
that Mr. Sperling, who is in daarge of HFB's European headquarters at Munich,
was in Washington for debriefing and would be available for a few minutes
discussion relative to Landowski. In this discussion Kr. Sporling advised
that Mr. Rampft, the regular MFE employes mentioned by Hr. Lang as going
to Greece "around the end of the year," was actually leaving in a week.
As this would of course make it more difficult if not impossible for Landowski
to explain his activities, on arriving in Athens several weeks after Kampft
had installed himself as the EII representative, the case officer protested
that this was counter to the spirit of the existing agreement. Mr. Sperling,
however, said the Rampft assignment to Greece had been planned a year earlier,
and that it was not possible to change it. He wided that he would help
Landowaki in every possible way, however, and asked that Landowaki visit his
office in Munich prior to starting work in Athens, for a thorough grounding
in HFB's Furopean programing operations.
8. At this point, the question of Landowaki'a cover was carefully
reviewed by this division, and a decision was made not to attempt to put the
man into Athens under an RFB contract if Eamoft were going out as the regular
representative of that organization. It seemed certain that both men would
be awkwardly placed, and that their ostensible functions would overlap unreason-
ably. The assignment of one or the other would have to be withdrawn, and,
through the division's channel to KFB (Fr. Lazarus), the withdrawal of the
Haspft assignment was requested. AVE's reply was affirmative and the division
vas informed that Rampft was to be sent to Trieste instead.
SCUART
9. However, upon

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_286.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECURITY REFORMATION
accounting mechanism was secure enough to permit large ($1000) monthly
payments to Landowski without questioning the extent of his services. Xr.
Lang stated that there was no security risk from RFE's internal accounting
or contracting procedure. He then mentioned that RiE planned to send one
of their own employees to Athens later, probably "around the end of the
year.” Although surprised, since this plan had not been mentioned to Mr.
Thompson by Hr. Phenix during the original discussion of Landowski in July,
the case officer did not go further into this, feeling that landowski would
have three months to establish his cover in Athens prior to the arrival of
the RFB maa.
6. In accordance with arrangements made with Mr. Lang, Landowaki
vas instructed to report in New York for a week's briefing in RFB affairs,
and on 24 September called at R/E's offices and asked for Mr. Lang's
assistant, Mr. Weld. Their meeting was most unsatisfactory, as Mr. Wold
was not familiar with Landowski's, background and standing with RFK, had
arranged no training for him, know of no contract, and was himself busy
with preparations for a trip to Airope. Upon receiving this information in
a phone call from Landowski, the division requested Mr. Lasarus of PT to
phone RFB and inquire into the status of the contract, and to urge that a
preliminary draft be submitted: to us. After several days delay, during
which one contract was drawn by RFB, submitted to Landovski who signed
and then withdrawn and destroyed by RPE officials, a new contract was finally
ezsented by both parties without this office knowing its terme.
later stated that he had felt it imperative to sign what was given his in
order to end his conspicuous position in RFB's offices, where he had spent
better part of several days in the waiting room. His training consisted of
little more than a tour of arŢilation.
Landovski
7. Khin Lents at *
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_284.jpeg ---
14-00000
2.
SECURITY INSTEMATIAN
The Case of Henry Landowaki
!
1. On 10 January 1951, at the request of Opa Athens, 38/PC (thru EË-1)
requested an operational clearance on Henry Landowski, then residing in
Athens. Landowsky, a Polish oitisen by birth, was naturalised a US oltison
on 25 July 1950. He is now 33 years old. The PC Field Station wished to
uss him as a contract agent under cover in Greece, engaged principally in
PV work and in recruiting and handling other agents. The clearance was
granted on 30 May 1951, and on 15 June Landowsky signed a contract in Athens.
The field dispatch outlining Landowsky's capabilities and the work
envisaged for him described him as a free-lance journalist, resident of
Greece for several years (his mother was married to a Greek), familiar with
the Greek language and fluent in Polish and German, and having certain con-
tacts in Greek government circles. His success in interviewing refugees
from the satellite countries had come to the station's notice, and it was
believed that under cover of such interviews he would be useful in gathering
material for propaganda use and in spotting and recruiting agents.
3. The field station suggested that a cover organisation be estab-
lished to operate as a neva agency in Athens with ostensible headquarters
in New York. This agency would notionally specialize in refugee news for
press and radio, and would appear to draw its main financial support from
contract with Radio Free Europe for the supplying of broadcast material
on refugee topics. It was the field's plan that this news servics would
also furnish cover to other Ope personnel in the future, when it might
plausibly expand as a business enterprise. To forward this idea, 83/PO
called on Ar. Thompson, Chief of SP, on 11 July 1951 for his assistanos in
obtaining RB's
LUNET
}
$

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_288.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
9. However, upon landowski's arrival in Athene on 16 October, he
found that Rampft was already there, contrary to the above understanding.
Zandowski consequently found himself obliged to justify his position, and
particularly his requests for access to refugees, as Hampft had already
presented his credentials to the Greek authorities, the American Embassy,
the American military authorities, and the international press representa-
tives in Athens.1 Landowski flew to Munich to confer with Mr. Sperling,
who in an effort to resolve the problem, suggested that Landowski change
the name of his supposed firm from "iurope News Service" to "Radio News
and Recording Service" and that he specialize in vire recordings of
refuges interviews. & new contract was therefore drawn in Mmich, using
the suggested title.
10. On 18 October a cable was received from Mr. Wisner in Athens rela-
tive to Rampft's presence there. This cable (IN 35284), for relay to Mr.
Jackson of NY and Mr. Lang of HFB, stated that the Athons station was
concerned lest Hampft prove as troublesome as one Ira Hamilton in Turkey.
On the same date an Ope Athens cable (IN 34940) Inquired if Rampft vero
cleared and if he knew landowski's CIA affiliation. Upon requesting PY to
obtain this information, this office vas informed that Rampft was alsared
and that he had gone to Athens on personal orders from Mr. Lang. On
1.
6 November a
In a subsequent intelligence report to Defense, the US Military Attache
in Athens referred to the peculiar Rampft/Landowski situation, the obvious
hostility between the men, the johnny-como-lately status of Landowaki con-
trasted to Rampft's prior arrival, and the MA's own reluctance to agree to
Landowski's nocess to refugees in the face of Hampft's attitude and the
apparent lack of official sponsorship for Landowski.
SELS.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_29.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
4
1.
American Consul te,
Filmburg, Austria
Debruary 7, 1952
Mr. Alexander A.
Fr. Mala Oyorky,
Back Export & Immort Corary,
215 Fourth Avenue,
New York 3, inebark.
First
The receipt is acknowle ed of four letter of January 22, 1952
together with a copy of the latter are ced to the American
Consul te toneral in tunich regar certain private transactions
you arrear to have had with the lite Fr. terhen Mainesyk, an
American citism who died in Calabar on "anuary 1, 1752.
In accordance with its standing instrations and peddling the
decision of the propriate leal a thorities, the Consulate is
acting as provisional consemnator of the effects of the deceased,
It would amper that "r. Maincayk trectate and the bosonlate
2
has been endeavoring to obtain it from the cobaed'a
stiums
brother, Mr. Charles Mainant, 119 eeley Ave, Chicago, Illinois,
the netreat known kin for advice er his interest in the estate.
Under the a circunstan vill recommise that the Consulate
has no a thority to take a cs of any claim
c
my have against
the estate excerting to be in inn
interest and to refer
you to the Court that will here ridict on over the matter when
the estate will he left our la
At such time as
;
and requested to a³ rose to that p
will be informent
20
Bioregrigu
incerely yours,
Robert 9. Debrecer
* American Consul
]

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_290.jpeg ---
1
SECURITY INFORMATION
has not handled his affairs in a secure or professional manner, and is
not wanted by the field station. The division plans to terminate him,
read him out of any connection with RFE, and arrange that he do placed
with a commercial firm for employment as a junior public relations san.
Simple dismissal is not regarded as socure; continued employment by the
Agency is undesirable, hence the need to find him employment of sorts
until his familiarity with CIA activities has cooled.
SECRET
00000-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_292.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
8 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Letter from Admiral Miller
Exacunve t
2-7861
1.
Attached is a copy of a letter from Min Miller in
which he suggests the necessity of coming to a definite deci-
sion in respect to a future balloon operation.
2. Can you take the time to get a policy decision from
the State Department as to (a) whether they wish to have a
balloon operation in August or at any subsequent date, and
(b) whether they want us to set aside funds and materials now
for a future balloon operation at some unspecified time?
Attachment
Thomas W. Braden.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Ltr from Adm Miller 1 Apr 52.
CIO: ThE/sh
Orig - Addressees
1 cc - ADPC
2 cc - CIO
2 cc
->>
RI
SECRET
i
;
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_289.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
6 November a cable (IN 39122) was received from Ope Athens referring to
the unsatisfactory situation resulting from Hampft's appearance in Athens
and stating that, if a permanent HFE representative were actually necessary
in Athéns, it should be someone other than Rampft, who was reportedly lack-
ing in security sense and said to be a heavy drinker. Through the ease
officer assigned to this matter, this division thereupon requested #r.
Braden's help in learning from WWE how much Rampft know of Landowski's
covert ectivities, whether Rampft would conduct his own work in a manner
acceptable to the CIA Senior Representative in Athens, Mr. John Baker, and
whether Rampft had been instructed to cooperate with Landowski without
attempting to oversee his activities. No answer has been received to those
queries.
information.
11. Late in November the division was advised by Security that unspeci-
fied derogatory information had been received regarding Landowski; the
field station was consequently instructed to hold up his use pending fuller
Early in January, upon receiving an adverse completed report
from Security, the field was instructed to return Landowski to Washington
for termination. It was considered unwise to inform Landowski, while still
in Greece, of the reason underlying his recall; he has consequently been
told that the dual RFE representation in Athens (Rampft and Landowski) was
no longer workable and that RFE had insisted on keeping its own Kan. He
believes that a new RFE assignment may be possible for him after his return
here late this month (his trip has been delayed by his mother's recent death
in Athens).
;
12. The landowski problem has now become one of recall and disposal.
Quite aside from the RFB relationship, the man has not performed vell,
SECRET
has not

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_291.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET 3147
P.-:82
L-217
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
12-7867
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across sheet
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
1
TO
CIO
ROOM
NO
DATE
REC D
FWO'D
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
1.
2.
DD/P.
Col. Taylor.
10
azri
ER
Kaylan
NO.
DATE
30/959
68829
8 April 52
COMMENTS
7.
8.
8.
10.
11.
12.
14.
-SPY/OPG-
DCPY
C-20
Mapil
8
opis J
Mr. Brewer:
George:
Fail asks that you attempt to get
from State the information which
Tom braden asks for. He asks that
1 bring to your attention the
following 2 points:
a. The Director does not feel
it would be acvisable to launch any
balloon operations until after the
Pi campaign has died down a bit.
b. The frition, through Adam
Watson. have raised the auction of
balloon operations with Rd and want
to discuss these operations during
the forthcoming PU-State meetings
on policy.
P. Taylor, 3rd
5t6- as from tak - K
I will call O'Meara
FORM NO. 81-10
FEB 1990
SECRET
P-2232
;

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_293.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
...
-
:
i
Dear Oliver:
RFP
the BFF
now might prejude
April 1, 1952
w
.....
We need to get a firm commitment with respect to the Crusade's next balloon
operation.
thit balen
Our best target from the point of view of geography and RFE radio coverage
is Czechoslovakia. We can go into Poland and Hungary somewhat less efficiently:
If Hungary should be the target, we will presumably still have the problem of
clearance from the British to launch from their Zone, and failing that
have to back up to our Zone.
track
Very hard
W
shouldfront.
We need an absolute minimum of three months to prepare a balloon operation;
the longer notice the better. A date of special significance to the target
country is perhaps of some slight additional desirability from the psycho-w
logical point of view. It is, however, not essential.
s.head-
for all
view of our campaign schedule, an initial launching date of about August
20th would be ideal. This would allow the story on the operation and its
effect to become known at the opening of our September campaign.
may
be a
at
fever
Wheat
by
Sep
We have in storage in Munich 50,000 packages (of two each) of razor blades,
100,000 zippers, 72,000 packets of needles (five to the packet), and 150,000
cakes of soap (1/2, 3/4 and one ounce sizes). All of the above except
needles were donations to the Crusade, and the needles were at cost. W9.
have had to tell Gillette and Talon twice (at Christmas and at Easter) that
the operation for which they supplied their products had been delayed. We
should very much regret having to do this again.
I do not know what keeps putting this off the track. It is my information
that the boys in the big house were initially enthusiastic about the idea,
and the record will show that Ambassador Priggs thought it most valuable
in Czechoslovakia, witness his special request that this means of communi-
cation be used at the time of the Czech Freedom Train break-out.
I would appreciate your getting us as soon as possible a positive and (barring
an act of God) irrevocable approval for a balloon operation into a specified,
target country at a certain date, with agreement in principal on the nature
of the operation -- i.e.; of an order of magnitude of 60,000 to 75,000
vehicles, bearing the above mentioned materials together with messages.
To repeat, by far the best target is Czechoslovakia; our preferred date:
around August 20th.
Let us not make this approval in principle (with firm date and target)
contingent on a budget, except in a general way. With an approval in hand,
we can proceed with plans and supply a fairly accurate budget, which will
depend somewhat on such things as whether we can use the P-20 balloons on
hand for the short flight to Prague or whether we will have to resort to
P-50's for the longer flight into Poland or from the U.S. Zone of Austria
into Hungary.
Sincerely,
now
for the
and
t
/s/ Leonard

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_294.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
SECREE
TY IN
t
;
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
QI SF, KE-2
28 April 1952
Future Balloon Operation
1. Attached is a copy of a letter from Min Miller in
which he suggests the neceualty of coming to a definite deal-
sion in respect to a future balloon operation.
2. Will you advise ne as to (a) whether you wish to
have a balloon operation in August or at any subsequent data,
and (b) whether you want us to set aside funds and materials
now for a future balloon operation at some unspecified time.
Attachment
Ltr from Min Miller
dtd 1 Apr 52.
CIO: TWB/eh
Orig
-> Addressee
1 cc - 10/TONIC
1 co- CIO
200 -
RI
TOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
GET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_295.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEHOWAFDUM FORT
DUEJICT:
SECRET.
7 April 1952
AQUISTANT DIRECTOR FI POLICY COORDINATION
Labor Service Companies
The exzot text of a 27 March 1952 letter from the Political
Advisor of MFE at Munich to the Iresident of NCFE is supplied
below for your information.
"This is in respect to the various labor Service
Companies made up of hestern European exiles now exist-
ing in Cermony.
"There have been Polish Labor and Quard Companies
ever since the var end these are what their name
implies. There have been set up, however, within the
Last year Czechoslovak and hulgarian Lator Servios
Companies here. These latter two represent an activity
with which our friends are directly involved. I have
been informed by them upɔn my inquiry that should any
reference be made by satellite propagenda to these
companics it is desired that in any 1 FE comment upon
it that these companies should be treated as being
what their name implies.
"The Czechoslovak Company included both Crecha and
Elovaks, although I understand that the Slovak Separatists
here make violent efforts to have a separate one for
themselves. The Bulgarian Company is at present made up
almost entirely of adherents of Dimitrov. Further reoruit-
ing, however, in this respect is now going on with a policy
of barring both Bulgarian National Front and Mitrov
followers.
"I am also informed by my friends here that active
planning is now under vay in respect to the sersten
Amendment. I should much appreciate it if we could keep
informed of any developments in this respect here for
possible use in MF broadcasts and for conversatiɔns
with friends."
S$
LA
TILMAS b. BRADLE
Chief
International Organisations Division
CIO/KEY: by
tributions 1 10/DOTO - 1
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_299.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
1
Hi
t
11444
Comes
up
1
1
}
at PRC
is scheduled on
Friday after
that we need
AC.
to advise adoniral
☐
to apply to 1848
if PRC
appr
That is
n.
S

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_298.jpeg ---
Raa
* Aut
**DEW
**
7
14-00000
· SECRET
Security Information
4. I am somewhat confused by the contents of the action
paragraph following paragraph 3, in which you indicate that we
are continuing to urge NCFE to extend cover assistance to the
Kirk Committee. On the basis of our most recent conversations
with Mr. Dulles and Admiral Miller, I was under the impression
that you were trying to dig up some other forms of cover - par-
ticularly in view of the reluctance of the NCFE Board to extend
the Crusade cover to the Kirk Committee. Perhaps this paragraph
of the reference memorandum has been overtaken by events.
5. I understand that you are getting up a memorandum on
the Landowsky case. I am relieved to hear that Landowsky has been
rocalled from Greece and that it is not intended to have him
return.
\ NB.V.
11Aμsz
Bank Swisher
Done
cc: DDCI (with reference memorandum)
FRANK G. WISNER
I
1
SECRET
Security Information
yes.
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
->>>
13.95
4.
7
replied that in fact (FV did receive constant and frequent policy
guidance but tint the wombers of tio to staff of RFF were looking
for the type of policy ruddance wille did fot odsl -- a kind of
overall global strategy coverin, realfic incidents and eventuall-
time, a kind of poliq uldance wien rolably neither would mor
ould be written. Specifically he had no objection to slowing the
top people policy line.
i
4
Finally, hp. Kohler questioned the adviua'ility of putting the
now kuɔsian Umittee under the Crusade. He pointed out is fear
that, what wito kay and FA already under the Crusade, the Congress
would won believe there was nothing left for VGA to cover. 1.E. Joyce
rose to bila question explaining the necessity of helping Admiral kirk
to find cover. He pointed out that recurs. hraman and Devino
had been detailed to acsure that Crusado publicity did not give the
impression that HPE and ki and any new " rivato” radio would obviato
the necessity for the Volou, and assured Ka lor but all Crusade
publicity, posters etc. would avoid this posity. Misner man-
tioned nia desire to find better cover for the new Committee ani
there was some talk of rouniations. No better cover ad, owever,
been found at the moment and it was a parent that Admiral kirk must
have some answer to questions wilen are outal tled to him. br. nuder
anowored this argument by reiterating his foars.
j
Ab. HURE
Idef
International organizativos Dividon
CIO:ThB/ch
Orig
1 cc
-
pc (thru Ais ( )
DD/Y
1 cc - Fr (Mr. Poor)
1 cc
-> Y
1 cc - ☐☐
2 cc - RI

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_297.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
SECRET
Security Information
ER-2-7715
7
5 April 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
PROM
Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT
-
National Committee for a Free Europe
Pree Europe
Miscellaneous Recommendations for
Action
-
Radio
REFERENCE
Memorandum from C/10 to D/DCI, DD/P and ADPC
dated 27 March 1952
1. I have read the reference memorandum which I note contains
quite a number of recommendations for action, some of which apply
to the undersigned.
2. I would like to participate in the Princeton bull session
but believe it unnecessary for CIA to be represented by so many
people. If Mr. Dulles is going I should prefer to drop out. A
further reason for reluctance on my part to attend this meeting is
that I have already passed on to the NCFE people interested all of
the ideas and information which I have on the principal theme of this
discussion. I therefore feel that, until after the forthcoming meeting
with the British or the development of the Psychological Strategy Paper,
which is being laboriously ground out by Admiral Stevens' Ad Hoc
Committee, I would have nothing new to contribute. However, if Mr.
Dulles is unable to attend and you feel that I should go, I would be
willing to do so.
3. Concerning your report of Frank Altschul's feeling of
grievance, I should be glad to sign a letter to him if Mr. Dulles
agrees that I am the proper person to do this. Pending Mr. Dulles'
consideration of this matter, will you please prepare in draft form
for my signature a friendly letter to Mr. Altschul in which you might
comment upon the fact that NCFE-RPE now represents one of the most
potent weapons in our entire arsenal, and following with an acknowledge-
ment of the very important contribution which Mr. Altschul made toward
the development and shaping of this instrument.
Vinay was
N
31 March 52,
Overtaken, & balians, Serbiy
Mr. Bulls' letter of
SECRET
Security Information
1 copy of which
a
You
7
I
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_296.jpeg ---
14-00000
STRICTL Y PRIVATS
R:
27 March 1952
BA
Dear Admiral Miller:
This is in respect to the various Labor Service Companios
made up of Eastern European exiles now existing in Germany.
There have been Polish Labor and Guard Companies ever
since the war and these are what their name implies. There
have been set up, however, within the last year Czechoslovak
and Bulgarian Labor Service Companies here. These latter two
represent an activity with which our friends are directly in-
volved. I have been informed by them upon my inquiry that
should any reference be made by satellite propaganda to
these companies it is desired that in any RPE comment upon
it that these companies should be treated as being what
their name implies.
+
The Czechoslovak Company included both Czecha and Slovaks,
mako
although I understand that the Slovak Separatists here
themselves. The
violent efforts to have a separate one for
Bulgarian Company is at present made up almost entirely of
adherents of Dimitrov. Further recruiting, however, in this
respect is now going on with a policy of barring both Bulgarian
National Front and Dimitrov followers.
I am also informed by my friends here that active plan-
ning is now under way in respect to the Kersten Amendment.
I should much appreciate it if we could keep informed of any
developments in this respect here for possible use in RFE
broadcasts and for conversations with friends.
CC 1
Mr. Leich
Mr.
Galantiere
Sincerely,
/s/ BILL
W. E. Griffith
T

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
.-81
John Shield.
Dick kunsiza
6 Mar 52
1. I have discussed this with
who asks that he receive
Myers
The full report.
Therefore suggest that
you prepare: 1) a sterile
Petter to be sent to four
Myers giving all essential
fasts and a copy of the unclassi-
fiat latter. On this basis, he
will cable Munich and into us
results for
our transmittal
of State.
2. Think interim reply to state
should say: the matter is
being investigated at source
in connection settlement
Maincy's Estere via R&E.
MBV
☑

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_300.jpeg ---
L
*
:
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
PROCEDURE
FOR
TPMEDIC TRANSFÖRS
}
2 APRIL 52
1
Step 1. a. Facility (TPTOTIC, PILLAR or what have you) sends
letter of request to MEDIC.
Step 2.
Step 3.
b. Facility sends certified true copy of request (la.)
to 10 (via area division involved if not for TPTONIC
as set forth in Step 2 below).
FOR TPTONIC only (Includes BGCAKEBOX)
a. 10 prepares letter for ADFC's signature, addressed
to LEDIC, authorizing MEDIC to transfer funds requested
by TⱭIIC to TONIC on basis of la, above if request is in
order.
b. MEDIC receives letter of authority (2a.).
c. MEDIC transfers funds to TONIC on basis of 2b. and
at the same time prepares a letter of transmittal
addressed to TONIC, copy to IO.
d. TONIC, upon receipt of funds from MEDIC (20.), prepares
a letter of acknowledgment addressed to MEDIC, certified
true copy to IO.
e. 10 prepares letter addressed to CFD, signed by IO, trans-
mitting receipts 2d. together with certified true copy
of letter 2a. (See 2f below).
f. IO prepares letter addressed to CFD, signed by CIO,
requesting CFD to reimburse MEDIC for the total amount
of receipts 2e. Note: Letters 2e and 2f are hand
carried to CFD together.
g. CFD, on basis of 2f transfers funds to MEDIC.
h. MEDIC acknowledges receipt of 2g by letter to IO.
FOR OTHER THAN TPTONIC and BGCAME SOX (after Step 1)
a. Area division authorizes CFD to transfer funds from
"XXX" Project to MEDIC for transfer to facility by
letter, signed by appropriate area division chief.
(Note: This letter comes to IO whose responsibility
it is to determine that funds are available in
"XXX" Project).
SECRET
-1-
Page 1 of 2

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_304.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
NATION
TY HAL NA UDET PUROPE
{
Problem
To clarify the relationshi" of .FK to CIA and the respective
responsibilities and authorities of each for the stuct of N.1
operations.
Background
There is no currently elective sloer statement on to the
respective responsibilities and authorities of TV and CIA for the
conduct of operations. This has resulted in a number of misundere
standings and problems with respect to the administration of this
project by CIA.
Disqussion
In order to define the respective responsibilities and
authorities of 7 and CIA, it is proposed that an agreement be
entered into between IE and IA which will in effect provide fort
a. Polley, pro ran, tudgetary, security control, and
veto power by CLA,
Folley A
b. Suɔjnet to such coneral min`rala direct administrative
and operational contral over its operaticas by Ruiz,
8. The working out of sauhinery for sutaitting enrual
operating programs and eveporting bugate by &E for a proval
by CIA (and for absequent acfitions thereto)
A.
Adequate progress, financial, and other reports by
SCVE to CIA.
An outline of the principal provisions of such an
ement is set forth in Attachment
.
It is the contenene of all concerned in LA that
something like the above is essential. There is ons teeraical
point of difference, however, bet-en the invisiem and
the Arbainistrative taff ocial. This is the matter of a
CIA regulatina (Memorandus for All tall and Divisira thiefs
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_301.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Step 3. FOR OTHER THAN TPTONIC AND BGCAKEBOX (CONTINUED)
b. 1O prepares letter to CFD with letter 30 attached
for ADFC's signature requesting CFD to transfer funds
to MEDIC. (See 3c. below).
c. At same time letter 3b. is prepared, a letter for
ADPC's signature is prepared by IO authorizing MEDIC
to transmit the funds to facility(addressed to MEDIC).
d. MEDIC receives letter of authority 3c.
e. MEDIC acknowledges receipt of funds which CFD transmits (3b)
f. MEDIC transfers funds to facility on basis of 3d and at the
same time sends letter of transmittal to facility, copy to
IO.
g. Facility, upon receipt of funds from MSDIC, prepares a
letter, addressed to MEDIC, acknowledging receipt of funds 3f.,
certified true copy to IO. (See lb.)
h. 10 upon receipt of letter 3g. prepares letter addressed
to CFD and transmitts same together with copy of letter
(certified true copy) 3c.
}
}
NOTE:
It will be the responsibility of the Administrative Office/IO to
verify that funds are in fact allotted for each project before
preparing the above papers.
Distribution:
EXO/10 - Original
Adm 0/10 - 1 copy
FY/Maggio - 1 copy
->>
2.
-
SECRET
PAM
Page 2 of 2

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_303.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
S
RETRATION
144
10. A provision that will have veto authority over
activities to be undertaken by N wilch are contrary to other
Cia or national policies. (8)
imported that d
the card)
11. A provision with respect to the termination of operations
under the agreement.
your
17. A provision with respect to indemnification of #20
directors, officers, and aloyer by A.
13. provision that defines the liability of ott to each
à
director, officer, and employee of
fore
14. A provision to the effect that for will provide SEA with
regular progress and financial reports,
A provision that Grå will have authority tɔ conduct mich
surveys and audits of NCTE activities as it deems necondary,
:
t
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_302.jpeg ---
14-00000
...
yue
Provisions of red remment eteran HUFF and (ZA
It is proposed that an arreement which will include the
followding be entered into toli and A.
(✓
1, à statement to the effect that subjent to the rourity,
program, bu petery, anglies mantrole veta muthority of
wi wď
$1 set forth below,
administrative and sporational
resremsibility for the count of its operations,
You
*
2. A provision that will subit to UZA an auraal
operating plan and euprosting butant for the program which it plans
to undertake during gach fit year. The approval of such operating
program and bu by W/A will inclule authority to li½"to proceed
ar necessary in their Judgrent to avarlish the objectives set
forth in the approved program, subject to santrols set forth below,
4
3. A provision that 807
fiscal controls.
you
vill maintain adequate accounting and
h. A provision this will undertake only thinee programs
which have been approved by 74,
jou
5. A provision that SIA will provide funt, to #/8 for
aproved progress.
int
6. 4 provision that GLA Mill furnish national polley pui ance
for the conduct of sich programs and that AGE will conform
to such policy.
you
7. A provialem that will conform to security regulatione
to be prescribed by CIA. Then will inclue the cecurity cle rance
of necessary permal, ortaining of security agreements from all
witting personnel, ant necessary physical scority measurede
À provision to the affect that the general vorzanivational
structure and salary scales increasing allowances vili to aproved
by cis.
you
9. A nrovision that the prevident and vice-presidents
will be 'anhloyed subject to the courtance of tia,
¡
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_305.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
PEBRET
Pubjects Categories of Personnel front John H, Corris)
to the effect that all sitting peronanel of CIA proprietory
organizations must have a contract relationship with -là,
The underlying reasons for this requiresent are (1) veneral
control, (2) security control, and (3) to provide a basis for
establishing a legal liability to such persunal in un event
of a claim of any in. It is the view of the 10 vivision
tind
that the above three recutrements could be better an! more
aleanly wet by ano agrescent btween CA and F, rather than
by several caparate agreements beteren witting intivi ali and
GJA.
The office of the General Counsel, CIA, had infiented
informally that there is no legal objection to such an a-tre
ment batzsen F and GIA. is also coneurs informally that
one antract between and CA preferable to several
comtracta beturen in lil and LIA,
Recon endation
3.
It is therefore prevemented that the 10 nivialm be authorized
to negotiate an vereement with a in coordination with the office
of General Counsel and other CIA units which will incorporate the
substance of the provisions in Attachment 4,
2. It is also recomended that the 0 or other appropriate 6 å
authority set acido the agency roulation requiring that all witting
personnel of proprietary trofiets be required to execute a contract
with CIA.
DARET
i
1
i
"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_306.jpeg ---
14-00000
For Brenden
}
At Past - he's the
ausive to the State Paper
the RFE. Sarry for the
delas. Please let us know
if it's ok w. you
I do thick that our
difference w. State on this is
very basic
and Hial we
can't contrive to operate on
2 different premises. Mas be
this should be thrashed out
high level policy meeting.
Elle
i a

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_31.jpeg ---
14-00000
What sit
employment
contract RTE plopers
eater into with PiZE
specifically any
restrictions on ties.
té
orbike interests
While employed with
R7E. ?lo posticularing
this in regard to
it
M. if his case his
particular
is
m
Type of security,
agreement which FA
Employees sign.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_307.jpeg ---
14-00000
P
Y
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Joyce
FROM1
EE Mr. Farbour
The Functions of ECFE and RFH
STOLE
SECURITY INFORMATION
January 23, 1952.
In our experience with NCFE and RFE two interpretations of their
functions, between which the pendulum swinge from time to time, have
developed. One which is set forth in the peper in the mission of
HCFE and RFE, gives dignity and importance to the National Councils as
the leadership organs of the Eastern European peoples in wer struggle
against the respective Communist dictatoronto and defines the principal
function of RFE an providing a way of communication between the se
councils and the homelands in conducting the liberation struggle. In
the other view, which tends to govern RFE operations at the present
time, the RFE is apparently considered a predominantly American
enterprise with the objective of achieving a bigger, better, more hard-
hitting, and more publicized propaganda program than the 74 but not
differing fundamentally from the character and course that VOA has
already marked out. The latter interpretation reduces the position of
exiles connected with the RFE to that of professional employees engaged
by the Americans, and the National Councils are given so direct
responsibilities.
As between these two theses, agrees generally with the first.
If RFE continues along its present course it will in our opinion became
in the end simply another VOA (in fact the programming of the two
organizations tends already to seek a common denominator) and disappoint
the exiles and the peoples in their homelands. This will lead to
competitive issues with VOA as is already the case with the Baltic
language programs. If RFE is to achieve its first promise and full
justification it must become the Voice of hastern European freedom
speaking through the mouths of the Eastern European leaders themselves.
EE believes that unless the RPF broadcasts are made in the name
of the National Councils and the free exile leaders of hastern Europe
can speak regularly to their people by this medium the National
Councils will never become more than creatures of arrested development
and, deprived of the possibility of realizing one of their rest
important functions, will preoccupy themselves with sterile partisan
rivalry and internal differences.
As the reference memorandum points out, if the National Councils
are to assume this important respensilility in relation to the they
must become effective organisations. EX likewise agrees that the
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_309.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-3-
The strongest force in inducing the national exile groups to pull
themselves together into some kind of unified and active councils may
well be our insistence that until they do so they will not become
eligible to take over the proposed RFE responsibilities.
If one
National Council receives access to RFE facilities this should prove
an incentive to the ethers without our intervention to put themselves.
in order so that they may do the same.
As to the surerision to be exercised over the National Councils
which have taken charge of the broadcasting efforts to their respective
homelands, it is obvious that they will need extensive professional
assistance, whether by Americans or by their own nationals, in
preparing the day-to-day programs. The councils will probably wish
of their own initiative, after they have discovered what daily
programing involves, not to go behond (a) policy determination as
to type of prograrring, (b) utilization by the political and intel-
lectial exile leaders of the opportunity to speak from time to time
to their people, and (c) decision on selection of certain program
items. If this assumption is correct then our controls might properly
be limited to (1) providing each group a recorded outline of American
foreign policy for guidance if they discuss any phase of this subject
or its implications, (2) preventing partisan abuses such as the
disproportionate use of the HFE by one party although making sure
that the representatives of each may have access to RFE facilities if
party representatives so wish, and (3) conducting an ex post facto
review of programs in avoiding abuses of any type. In general it would
be desirable to allow the councils the maximum scope of activity and
responsibility in the RFE effort they are capable of undertaking in
order to nurse the health and vitality of these councils as leadership
organizations in the liberation struggle.
FUR:EE:HCVedeler/ml
January 23, 1952
SECRET
POST

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_310.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED
CONF .TIAL
SECRET
BOTTOM)
ISENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
1
IQ
Mr Braden
2. WALTONIC- Personnels
3
-
File Our office
INITIALS DATE
-JNB
S
FROM
2
3
-
INITIALSI DATE
:
APPROVAL
☐ ACTION
☐ COMMENT
☐ CONCURRENCE
☐ ☐ ☐
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
FILE
REMARKS: Toww: wdmm. left this auth
no. the have all read. also
John Shields has road. He suggested
we
keep-custeal
it in his file.
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
CONFIDENTIAL
30-4
Nancy
RESTRICTED
the
his ketaining
ok sto
a² 9000 paper.
CUGLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_311.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
Admiral Miller
FROM:
Mr. Myers
MEMORANDUM
April 1, 1952
$
Attached is presentation describing our exile personnel
policy. This paper is prepared in two parts, the second pert of
which is not yet in type. The part delivered horewith is, I feel,
a precise rebuttal of any overall uninformod criticism to which we
have been subjected.
In every instance where there has been specific criti-
cism involving individuals employed at New York or Munich we are
in a position to rebut charges of Communist infiltration and to
defend every member of the staff thus attacked.
Upon the impression that it is an adequate statement in
writing, it can be delivered, if you so desire, to Mr. Ehrens for
a study and contrast with the supposed allegations he presumably
has under scrutiny. Should Ehrans ask for information of spc-
cific neture, Part Two of this paper can then be furnished him if
you wish to do so.
Tom
!
¦
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_308.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Hungarian National Council, being the only National Council which is
active in any degree as a unified and effective leadership group,
should be given tan proposed RFF responsibilities at once and that as
soon as the other national groups become affective organizations RFE
facilities should be made available to then.
Such a course raises two problems which do not seem sufficiently
treated in thio reference paper, namely (1) the means of bringing about
the formation of unified and effective National Councils, and (2) the
extent and character of mpervision to, be exercised over liational
Councils once they undertake KFR activities.
EF concurs that NCFE should devote itself as a priority and primary
function to fostering the creation of effective National Councils.
The
reference paper suggests that to this end NCFE give more attention to
the problem and treke more positive measures in the nature of interven-
tion in assisting the national groups to solve their difficulties. It
geons to EE that by the very nature of the arrangement whereby the
National Councils operate in the American milieu and receive financial
artistance from the NCFE intervention is inevitable and that the NCFE
has not refrained from intervening. The problem apparently is not
whether the NCFF should intervene in the affairs of the National
Councils but what kind of intervention should prevail. EE continues
to believe that the ideal situation obtains wien a National Council
operates effectively with the least ossible intervention, and that a
national group should be encouraged to achieve effective organization
and operations through its own efforts. Excessive intervention and
certain types of intervention can produce such harm as to defeat the
very purpose we seek to realize, that is, the development of strong,
dignified, and immortant leadership organizations to conduct the
national liberation effort from abroad. The wrong types of interven-
tion inimical to this objective include actions which are widely
construed as(1) being in favor of, or in opposition to, one candidate
or party as arainst another in the organization of a National Council,
(2) representing an attempt to impose a policy with respect to the
future constitutional organization of a state or in relation to foreign
states or foreign ponulation grouns, or (3) relegatin exile leaders
a subordinate position of being employees of the Americans. Interven-
tion of the foregoing types must be avoided by all means, yet on the
other hand it is essential to accura, by intervention if necessary,
that no National Council falls under dictatorial rule and that indivi-
duals are held to accountability so that our undertaking does not
degenerate into sim ly a pensionary system for subsidizing the conduct
of party politics.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_312.jpeg ---
14-00000
NCF5 AXILE PERSONNEL SELECTION IN RELATION TO
(1)
EXILE POLITICS,
(2)
RFE BROADCAST POLICY, AND
(3)
EXTERNAL CRITICISM
INTRODUCTORY HISTORY
i
A.
Formative Stage
At its inception, the National Committee for a Free Europe
believed that its Iron Curtain broadcasting operation, Radio Free
Europe, could and should be developed and pursued through the medium
of "National Councils" or "Committees of Liberation" composed of
exile groups from the target countries. It was considered that
prominent exile leaders and personalities of each nationality group
--
could express to their captive countrymen, entirely without American
advice and guidance, the message of hope which NCPE proposed to sand.
This concept was not fulfilled. Experience in attempting to weld a
talented, dedicated group of exiles into a non-partisan broadcasting
operation early demonstrated that without American control the mission
of RFI would be lost in the jungle of exile-world politics. It soon
became evident that the leadership among the exiles was neither suffi-
ciently streng nor personally willing to rise above the political cross
currents, factional rivalries, ant splinter-group weaknesses character-
istically reminiscent of the political affairs of all Eastern European
countries. These factors militated against the original plan of permitting
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_314.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
D
sought that objective, while Czechs desired opposite views to be aired
and advocated the rebirth of pre-war Czechoslovakia. Each group sponsored
and insisted upon employment of its own more or less qualified adherents
upon the assumption that its special views would be thereby expressed
to the captive Czechoslovak audience of RFE. Similar activities were
pursued by Hungarians, Bulgarians, and Poles until the futility of per-
mitting the exilo Councils to control the destiny and broadcasting
policies of RFE was made clear beyond refutation. It became tragically
obvious that uncontrolled exile-world Councils and professional poli-
ticians could not agree on personnel selection or program content.
In spite of every effort to induce harmony in and obtain proper
cocperation from the "Councils", "Committees", and individuals, RFE was
confronted with an impasse. The alternative theory and present polloy
of American selection of non-political exile personnel was the only way...
out. It has worked. Technically qualified personnel produce properly
oriented programs -- and have been doing so with documented success
since July, 1950. Disappointed exile politicians, professional exile
camp followers, disturbed American special pleaders, and alarmed Communist
Agents all scream, anipe and snivel but RFE programs are doing the job.
--
NCFE-RFE records of this stage can be supplied by Frederic R.
Dolbeare, Vice-President, National Councils Division, and Robert E. Lang,
Director, FFE. The current policy has the complete endorsement of these
officers and of the Board of Directors of NCFE.
+

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_313.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1
exiles, through their loosely organized Councils or Committees, to
wholly develop, manage, and control RFZ broadcasting.
Since the advent of RFE was the most important development
affecting the oxilon which had occurred since their flight from home,
they quickly understood and applauded its implications and potential
effect on their futures. Through this instrument they could once
again become prominent and powerful in the offairs of the homoland;
once more they could contend for place and power.
views.
Selection of personnel for the purpose at hand quickly became
a political football of rival leaders, personalities, and groups.
Rightists, Leftists, Centriste, Labor Elements, and Splinter-groups
argued with us for advancement of their particular personal or political
Sponsorship of their own adherents as PFE employees through whom
such views would be broadcart to their captive countrymen became the
pattern of their pseudo cooperation. This pattern was followed to such
an extent that ordinary progress and sensible development of our basic
purpose of truly free broadcasts under exile control soon appeared to
be not only impracticable, but dangerous. For example, the National
Councils Division attempted to inaugurate broadcasts to Czechoslovakia
under the auspices of a Czechoslovak National Council. The Council was
and is made up of exile personalities of differing political views and
parties. Its factions proceeded to engage in endless disputes and ir-
reconcilable claims for control of script production and program content.
Storak "Sopamitists" arguing for the total independence of Slovakia
1.
f
2
•

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_316.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
Many
identified publicly with domestic political philosophios at issue in
their own countries. Many, in fact, most of the staff people are con-
troversial figures among their own countrymon in exactly the same way
that prominent Americans are controversial in our political arena.
indeed are members of the Councils, but are mon of sufficient stature
to give their primary allegiance to the non-partisan policy of RFE.
"decisive factor is that there be no controversy or question about their
anti-Communist convictions and records.
The
At this point, it must be noted that our target countries have
been subject to repetitive political forment prior to and following
World War II, as well as the successive occupations of Nazi and Communist
Armies.
#
The tompor of the times, therefore, in which these exiles have
lived for the past fifteen years has been one of excitement, bitterness,
recrimination, rivalries, and personal turmoil -- all stemning from both
domestic and foreign struggles for power. The times have produced a
bumper crop of refugee traitors, collaborators, and opportunists and at
the same time have developed pure Westera style democrats, true national
patriots, and unselfish honest men. The exile who stood by placidly
through the era is not much good, however talented, as a militant messen-
ger of hope via RFE; exiles who were honorably active in public affairs
at home, and who had radio talent were, therefore, the only kind of
personnel suitable for RFE purposes.
As the necessity for American operational control of nationality
desks became self-evident, the only feasible personnel policy was to
- 5 -

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_315.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
B. Development Stare
This
Upon the collapse of the original concept of broadcasting under
exile auspices, RFE necessarily utilized some exile personnel endorsed
and recommended by the leaders of the various nationality groups. As
tochnical radio facilities came into being, exiles with radio background
or writing talent were required for the production of programs.
involved using individuals eminently qualified by experience to do a
radio job of script writing, announcing, acting, etc., without regard
for the fact that such individuals might be persona non grata with one
or another political faction or leader of an exile "Council". It also
involved elimination of proven inefficient, inept or unworthy individuals
without regard for their exile "Council" sponsorship. in either instance
criticism of RFE was predictable and indeed was always forthcoming
often in virulent and dishonest form.
The day to day operation of RFZ developed new techniques and
long range plans which made it impossible to employ non-entities of no
political color or conviction. The best people to produce programs in
harmony with NCFE-RPE purposes and policies necessarily wore persons
known in their own countries for their views on domestic political af-
fairs and their anti-Communist activities. Hard-hitting propaganda
required hard-hitting personalities whose known association with RFE
and its programs would add validity and significance for our captive
audiences. Gradually, therefore, the nationality desks of RFE at New
York and Munich were staffed with tested, qualified exiles who had been
- 1
-
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_317.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
:
C.
A.
employ properly qualified individuals, regardless of exile politics.
In the execution of this policy individuals who were useless were
eliminated without regard for political sponsors. This process still
goes on. Similarly, talented exile personalities recruited from any
source wore employed whorever needed. This process still goes on.
Both processes are in vogue with a healthy disregard for exile political
nuances and protests. Neither process is satisfactory to self-styled
exile leaders since it follows that the appointment of an individual
sponsored by one faction as a representative of its views, inevitably
will evoke howls of rage and criticism from the opposite faction. This
is an accepted fact of exile life. We have to live with it and get on
with the job.
Summary
Our formative and development experiences evolved the present
and continuing exile personnel policies of RFZ. Exile desk employees,
whether at New York or Munich, must respond to three tests:
(a) Security clearance,
(b)
Endorsement of technical proficiency,
(c) Sufficient stature to eliminate exile partisan
interests from program content.
->
II -
-
CRITERIA AND METHODS OF PERSONNEL SELECTION
Recruitment -- General Principles
The best source of exile personnel is referral by "non-
professional" exiles themselves.
Among all nationalities there are
6

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_318.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
many talented refugees who need employment and who can supply RFS's
need for script writers, actors, announcers, etc. Accordingly, desk
staffing has been accomplished by examining the qualifications of duly
recommended individuals, whether the recommendations come from political
personalities or otherwise. Selection is based on the ability of the
individual to fill a need efficiently in turning out or participating
in planned programs.
Recruitment is determined only by ideological
security, independence of exile politics, and personal ability. This
is not to say that many individual exiles having decided personal con-
victions and well-known political records are not employed, but a
positive statement is made that those exile employees who now produce
RFE programs reflect the policies and guidance of RFE rather than pro-
motion of partisan objectives and personalities.
=
B.
Recruitment
00
Detailed Procedures
1
1
E
}
1
I
1
:
The personnel complement of each RFE nationality desk is
founded on a hard core of dependable individuals, usually two or three
people, including the chief of the desk. "Dependability" is established
by exhaustive inquiry at all available sources to establish the desir-
ability, reliability, technical proficiency and security of the working
core of the desk. Sources used are:
(a) Exile political personalities in the United States,
(b) Exile references of high standing and known im-
partiality in the United States and Overseas,
(c) Overseas contacts and personal knowledge of our
American representative in Europe. (Royall Tyler-Paris),
(d) Checks and balances of our political advisor at
Munich (W. E. Griffith),
-7.
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_32.jpeg ---
14-00000
Dear Tom:
(
W-1792
Sam
1
With reference to the Stephen inczyk case which ✓ discussed with you
recent
during y ur/visit, several questions have risen concording the broader unjects
of the type of activity inczyk was undertuin on his in addition to nis
MFE duties.
Specifically, we would like to know what sort of cloyment contract re
employees cater into with XFE. If pooulble, we would like a copy of a typical
contract. We are interested in knowing mat restrictions, if any, are placed
on employeėš outside interests or activities while employed with RE, particulary
_ they would apply to a cute such as Månen
Minezya's. He would also like to have
information on the type of security screement presently use bottleen 2 and its
employees.
There are attached several
i
.
jersiering on the mainos occ
Paqu wape formarsed with a report on the matter which
This report
le of interest to
was
repared for our friends and the stre
Icon
was to the geral effect that the manager of the Salzburg office of Radio
Frie Europe has been dee,ly cancer.
MAINCZYK'S
for eventy arise from recat ceath
While lookin, through the perso ul effect of the decid,
MAINCZYK
assiutin, ima ividua láto
inding –
for the purpose of
1
the In..
•
to the U.C. Lone of
The Fayer has furn
rond district to stay but the extra vel fands
ofsed of a
te merican.
here it - teli andre tin
Tag ress Comply at org.
3 enclosures
Sincerely
Oliver Hadwood
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_319.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
(e)
British Broadcasting Corporation, where applicable,
(f)
Voice of America, where applicable,
(G)
Special confidential sources.
5
These tests having been applied, confidence is placed in these
initial personalities, and particularly in the Desk Chief, to carry
forward recruitment of additional personnel as needed in collaboration
with the American Director of RFE (Robert E. Lang, New York ), and his
associate officials. The leading personalities of each desk know what
is expected of them and since they respond to the established criteria,
the resulting full personnel complement is a group of exiles who, not-
with standing their personal political views, are suitable and capable
program production people. They meet our basic requirement of daily
production of truly free and properly constructed propaganda broadcasts
capable of avoking the widest possible audience response in our target
countries.
In brief, the mission of RFE being conceived as a marketing
problem, the best available salesmen are procured, trained, and utilized
to sell the market.
C.
Recruitment
14
Special Security Measures
Since RFE, although a private enterprise, is by extension a
collateral instrument of American national policy, special precaution
is exercised to insure the ideological security of all employees, in-
cluding exiles. In the case of exile personnel specifically, the
-
- 8 -
7
!
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_323.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
and the proven advantages of the democratic way of life for the worker,
the peasant, the administrator, and the business and professional
strata of society.
4. RFE takes counsel with exile leaders and is respectful
of their views, but its policy is not designed to further the aspira-
tions of any single exile leader or party.
5. RFE policy is further based upon acceptance of the prin-
ciple that oach of the liberated peoples shall be free to determine
for itself the political and social institutions under which it will
-
live once it has been liberated.
**
6. Finally, the following summary in the nature of a specific
limitation on progrum content is quoted;
"It is indispensable that all concerned grasp clearly
that RFE is a multi-national station established to
contribute to the liberation of all the peoples it
addresses, and not merely of one of those peoples.
RFE policy is therefore commanded by the limitation
that nothing may be said over its facilities to one
national audience which will destroy the confidence
in RFE of its other audiences or which is likely to
induce any of its audiences to prefer communist rule
to a liberation which might appear to promise domina-
tion by a neighboring people."
->
12 -

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_321.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
A. General Comment
III
RFE POLICY CUIDANCE FOR PERSONNEL
:
$
i
The programs aired by RFE are not left to whim or chance. All
programs and the personnel responsible for them are controlled by a
written polioy manual. The manual sets forth in minuto detail the
position and policy of RFE on every topic beamed to our target countries.
The manual is the daily guidance of all employees, both American and
Exile, deviation from its rules is not permitted. Continuous scrutiny
of manuscripts and resultant broadcasts is maintained by American om-
ployoos to insure that there are no deviations.
The policy manual of RFE represents the considered views of
the responsible officials, including the Board of Directors, of NCFE.
It is a statoment of the principies and purposes of NCFE expressed in
operational form. It is considered and maintained as a strictly con-
fidential document, but it is of course available for examination by any
proper authority.
i
¡ The policy manual is in strict conformity with current American
national policies as evidenced by the following quotation from Article
One:
1
"As a non-governmental radio station responsible to
: the millions of American citizens who support it,
RFE cannot take a line contrary to United States
Government policy or to the beliefs of the American
poople reflected in the Constitution of the United
States and in American Institutions".
i
1
->
10

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_320.jpeg ---
14-00000
4x4
t
}
:
additional approval of the Personnel Director of NCFE is required before
employment, either at New York or Munich. Thus, even if a proposed
exile employee meets all the described criteria ho may not be employed
without this ultimate approval.
The Personnel Director of NCFE utilizes appropriate and do-
pendable sources of information to determine the acceptability of
personnel from a security standpoint. His sources are investigative in
nature and are conclusive as to the ideological record and security
acceptability of the proposed employee. In doubtful cases the Personnel
Director consults with the Vice-President in Charge of the National
Councils Division and with the Director of Radio Free Europe. These
three officers of NCFE jointly follow a policy of rejecting candidates
about whom there is the slightest doubt. It is to be clearly understood
that in making decisions of this kind the conflicting interests and
frantic representations of politically minded exile leaders and groups
are ignored. Acceptance or rejection of candidates is wholly based on
ideclogical security and talent value.
D. Summary
(1) All nationality desks of RFE at New York and Munien are
staffed by individuals who have passed all tests described above.
(2) All programs produced and aired by the nationality desks
are checked and scrutinized by American supervisory personnel for ideolog-
ical content, audience acceptance and conformity to basic NCFE-RFE policies.
(3) These conditions have been progressively in force since
July, 1950.
6

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_322.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
The above quotation is understood by exile personnel par-
ticularly to be a sclemn injunction against ideological program content
which in any way violates the letter and spirit of American policy and
idoulc. It is a guaranted to the American people and to our captive
listeners that RFE and the men who make its programs are uncompromisingly
opposed to the Communist regimes now in power in Soviet Russia and the
satollito countrios.
B.
RFE Policy Defined by Handbook (Direct Quotations)
1. The purpose of RFE is to contribute to the liberation of
the Nations imprisoned behind the Iron Curtain by sustaining their
morale and stimulating in them a spirit of non-cooperation with the
Soviot-dominated regimes by which they are, for the time being, ruled.
2.
The central characteristic of RFE is that it is the in-
strument of men who are engaged in fighting for freedom and justico.
As such, it encourages resistance to every tyrant, great and small, in
the countries it addresses. Its speakers speak
°
as men of good will
who seek to contribute to the elimination of old enmities and the
building of an enduring European democratic order.
3.
As a free forum in which exiles speak to their own people
RFE is particularly dedicated to arguments by which exiles seek to
persuade their listeners of the all devouring ambitions of Soviet
Imperialism, the cruelty and unworkability of Communist Institutions
- 11 -
L
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_325.jpeg ---
14-00000
.35.
03
1197
t
In compiling the list of thirty namet, you should I believe,
choose individuals who fit into the "indispenzable" category by
virtue of their programming muui iden generation capabilities
rather than because of engineering or other technical background.
You will perhaps wish to know that a copy of this letter is
being sont by Allon to r. imples to whom Allen has recently sent
a lolated interim reply.
I hope that we tiny hear from you in regard to this list
an early unte. While we require the names, for your own informa¬
tion, those names—according to junt arrangements--would be
made known only to our own people, not to the military authorities.
For the latter, numbers we boro will suffice.
Yours sincerely,
12/ alver Hadwood
CIO/NEV:blj
Distribution:
-
Orig. Addre:300
1
-
2
1
-
-
->
Hughes (as stated above)
CIO
HI
TONIC CHRONO
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_324.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
{
149
SECRET
In reply refer W-1968
toi
31 March 1952
Lear Kini
On one of the matters Mich we discussed on lodramlay, 1.8.,
the rattal pool in fr. hugheo' letter, wo require o ascirtance
from you.
We have gone over this topio thoroughly and find that
this in the situation.
R.
The manter of indigere people vidch mom will
agree to include in their plan on our behalf is visy Hirited,
b. This being the case, we revuise from you a compila-
tion of names of insigonoue people, mot to exceed thirty, vhom
you woul i considor indispensable for the re-establishment of en
operation similar to that of Kenneth's firm in another orca, in
time of real heat. It is possible, but mt absolutely certain,
that we can arrange to include this group of thirty in our
provisions for time of trouble.
1
0. Moreover, we feel that it would be umise for us
to approach the Department of Defence officials at this time.
We, therefore, suggest that you approaer, the
Department of Defense directly and independent; with no reference
to the fact that we have an internet'in the matter as a vole, anu
with no reference to our interest in any part of it (e.g. ts
us
mæber thirty above). We feel that denural Clay and other
influential citirens who are concerned with your organization
may be of acristanoe in the direct approach which, we have
recommended.
I need not assure you that this cause is one of special
interest on our part; mor do I need to stress the practical
considerations within the airting impartment which coel
us to declare our own limitations and to surrest the direct
independent approach, for you are, I am sure, the first to
understand a problem of this tyre,
:
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_326.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
In reply refer
201 W-1954
11 Karch 1952
:
Dear Mins
I should op resiste your discussing a matter of
sona interest to as with Zemeth Walters. If agreeable
to him and to you, we should like to have from you a few
shenta of Radio Free Eurore stationery tɔ we for a
lotter, along 'he ims of the attached draft, to an
individual. in Petera (ity who has a redio station useful
to our purposes. The tra't is, I telleve, self-ex-lanatory,
althích not becauserlly in the final form the letter will
take. In case you are willing to assist us as an aited,
ve wald handle the money and accountings for it. You
will note, heurter, that the po sicility exists that the
funds will be attributed to Kenneth's organi sation,
Please return with your reply the enclosed Crait.
We will provide you with a cry of the latter which is
sont, if the plan is carried nut.
:
CIO/HEYibly
Mstributions
0818
– Adcrease9.
1 - CIO
2- RI
1 - TWIC Chrono
1 - 10/19/70
"incerely,
Oliver Hahood
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_327.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
New York
10 Beer 1951
Fr. Jars Clariton
Radioston Continental
Para City
Dear Jin,
5
Follow up our tath of last cus I believe I as now in
maition to a ist in your ecies to es international
comunita in the Pan
Turin the past for anths I
could not hol- but th of experience with the treach
Un erground after pm vero chat dish of hyra no bukt
have a sermonal interest in letting in Fanuza se přet
rust be done to keep the vestem world free.
-
-ool
here.
Unfortunately, Radi: Free Furn, the very naturaliof
its charter, camot out in setinting within this
But in the curt of our custom, I have been art roached a
group of porkutik, zeere, ending an atvernational re igi us
res minila a viviral 25 mm, who to
Inven kein or here of the comunist reatm.
he
I
thene 074)
is
an
in to this pr to the ent
J you the sha of 2500.00 per month for inite perio
which t Base you ar
concier erative in orlain an
freed in the peri
organi at
$
A
fart that yo
Labia: un the raw f
• rasa?
tro Tan Pun by a local
an ar
There is
-
Het gris : ..
un ld be no
cha local organization
Where
on to rer laining the source of the fun 5.
tion 3
al
In order to it
receivin
Bove length,
it w fore, the
wil
an
le mentaly anti ini atin station anal,
salaries of re za al,
Zbar: 00:0! or Pi
1
le let m
,,
tret i at
"
midle in 10 matter
"
1 in ividually, and int in
tehalf of die Furope which I an affiliate
Rudis Fr=»
nove
by the wa I met bad here thre He has a
Let me hear whether you will be alls to take Us on,
(4) nina: argent thi
6
th of
f't. w.)
Youro,
1121-19

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_329.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
31 March 1952
Dear Franks
I have been hoping to see you here in
Washington or in New York for some time past as
I want to take the opportunity to tell you how
much wo all appreciate the outstanding work you.
did in connection with NCPS. When we get to-
gether, I shall have an opportunity to express
this appreciation more fully.
Meanwhile, please let me know if you ɔlan
to come to eashington and I will do the sare if
and when I get up to New York. Unfortunately,
recently i have been tied down here with very
little opportunity to see my friends in New York.
Sincerely,
Frank Altsenul, sq.
40 Hall Street
New York, N. Y.
AWD: leb
Distribution
:
Orig.
1 co
->>>
-
Add.
Chrono
1 cc -
1 cc -
NCFE file
Pers
A
☺

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_33.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
+
18
© NEFE
11 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Photostats in re International Center of Fres
Trade Unionists in Exile, Paris
111
The attached photostats were made from accounting
documents, while they were in transit through us from a
TONIC representative, Paris, to TONIC headquarters. They
are forwarded, as indicated telow, to provide information
as to individuals associated with the subject organisation,
Attachment (6 paços)
CIO/NUV:blj
MOWAS W. BRATEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
Mistributions
0818
bE Mr.
- BE (FIVJY. Finott; +B/3-Fr. Freeman) (with attachments)
☑- FR (Mr. Overton); E (r. Arane) (with attachments)
SE
1 - 10 (Mr. Wiesner; Mes Stern) (with attachments)
☑
- Project OXFATULÉ file (with attachments)
- RI (with attachments)
C/10 (without attachments)
SECT

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_330.jpeg ---
487
f
2
:
14-00000
COPY
Room 1701
Tel. Judson 6-5526
Dear Allen,
:
1
1
1
FRANK ALTSCHUL
730 Firth Avenue
New York 19, N. Y.
April 3, 1952
Thank you for your letter. I have no
present intention of coming to Washington as for
the past week I have been knocked out by this virus
infection that has been going around. However, I
look forward to seeing you whenever you find it
convenient to drop in.
Yours sincerely,
Mr. Allen W. Dulles
1308 - 29th Street, N.W.
Washington 7, D.C.
/s/ Frank
i
i
! :
1
:
3
17

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_328.jpeg ---
14-00000
Jonis:
Care
we
This
-1'. April 32
Mr. Dalles has taken
If para
be relieved
re
one'
3. Assume
Jesper V
RESTRICTED
1
VTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM
1. UNCLASSIFIED
TO
-
"
✔
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
SECRET
Deputy Director, Plans
Chief, International Org.
INITIALS
784
FROM
-
N
DATE
INITIALS
DATE
Deputy Director
A.W.D. 4/9/52
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
REMARKS:
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
XIDATION
To me Bindin
was done
SIGNATURE
RETURI
DISPATCH
FILE
live with are you recent
7
;

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_332.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
!
-
SECRET
Security Information
T
4. I am somewhat confused by the contents of the action
paragraph following paragraph 3, in which you indicate that we
are continuing to urro NCFE to extend cover assistance to the
Kirk Committee. On the basis of our most recent conversations
with Mr. Dulles and Admiral Miller, I wan under the impression
that you were trying to dig up some other forms of cover - par-
ticularly in view of the reluctance of the NCFE Board to extend
the Crusada cover to the Kirk Committer. Perhaps this paragraph
of the reference memorandum has been overtaken by events.
1
5. 1 understand that you are petting up a memorandum on
the Landowsky care. I am relieved to hear that Landowsky has been
recalled from Greece and that it is not intended to have him
return.
COS
(Signed) FRANK G. WISHER
FRANK G. WIENER
DUCT (with
DICT (with reference :emorandum)
:
SECRET
Security Informaina

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_331.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security information
5 April 1952
2-7715
MEMORANDUH FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
FROM
SUBJECT
$
REFERENCE
Deputy Director (Plans)
National Committee for a Free Furope - Rady
Free Europe Fiscellaneous Recomendations for
Action.
-
Mancrandwa from C/TO to D/DCI, DD/P and ADPC
dated 27 March 1952
✓
1. I have read the reference femorandum which I note eleins
quito a number of recommendations for action, some of which apply
to the undersigned.
2. I would like to participate in the Princeton bull matrion
dut believe it unnecessary for C to be represented by so many
zeople. If Mr. Dulles is going I should prefer to drop out. &
further reason for reluctance or my part to attend this meeting is
that I have already passed on to the NCFE people interested all of
the ideas and information which I have on the principal tomma of this
discussion. I therefore feel that, until after the forthcoming meeting
with the British or the develoment of the Psychological Stram Faper,
which is being laboriously proume est by Adairal Stovene' Ad for
Committee, I would have nothing no to contribute. However, ^ *.
Dulles is unable to attend and you feel that I should go, I would be
willing to do so.
Concerning your report of Frank Altschul's feeling at
şziuvanco, I should be glad to s4% a letter to him if Mr. Dailes
agress that I am the proper person to do this. Pooding Mr. Olles'
emaideration of this matter, will you please crepare în draft Carm
For my signature a friendly letter so žr. Altschul in which you night
emment upon the fact that ACFI-KFT now represents une of the most
pusent weapons in our entire arsenal, and following with an acrnowledge-
swot of the very important contritation which . Altschul age toward
We development and shaping of this instrment.
&
SECRET
berzony m
"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_334.jpeg ---
14-00000
8), (1, 4, A
OFFICE OF
7 DEPUTY UNITED STATES REPRESEN NIVE
NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL
AMERICAN EMBASSY,
LONDON, W.1.
29 March 1952
Dear Allen:
This is a somewhat belated acknowledgment to your
note of 7 March. I expect to be back at 15 Broad around
the middle of May.
C. D. wrote me about going back on the Board of the
National Committee several weeks ago, and I have told
him that I am favorably disposed, but would like to de-
fer decision until I get back and have a chance to talk
with him and see what my general commitments promise to
ba. This is one which I should like to stay with be-
cause of my early association with you and the others
in setting it up. I also was very much impressed by
the layout in Portugal, which I went out to see after
the Lisbon meeting.
I hope all goes well with you,
Allen W. Dulles, Esq.
1308 29th Street, N. W.
Washington 7, D. C.
C. S. A.
Sincerely yours,
/a/ Chuck
Copy of this given to Nancy 14 Apr 52

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_335.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Tour:
3 úps 52
Suggest you
Adm Miller
tel
in
re 28 March letter
on Ea
bo for
the
neo'
he willing
we'd
to usek
on if it
me Red
0
def. estimates. he
Easy Redion to say would have to
1
Forsee no difficulty in
othing approval of
d. funds
for expenses incurred
or committed (21,879.39
Is this right? However,
Love there from
39) you.
full explan of Expenses
paid
2
and of Commitments as
21 av 52 would
Be c
Re helpful. Bu lathe.
P.O. nor do not entity
Extres).
To
for rest for Wo
on that

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_333.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
SECRET
31 Maroli 1952
NEDRANIUM HO Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
VIAL
Assistant Director for folicy Coordination
Deputy Director (Flans)
SUBJECT:
Radio Free Europe
1. As of April 1st, this Division plans to discontinuo its
routine informational support to Radio Free Europe. This support,
which has been carried out to a staff of about fourteen people,
originated in the necessity for RFE to have access to Foreign
Broadcast Intelligence Summaries, State Department information,
and other overt information wich came into CIA. It became apparent
smetine ago there was not enough of this material to fill out RFE
broadcasts and, as you know, RFE hired the so-called stringero to
do the onfef news-gathering job. Ine information cont RFE by us
has for some time been accessible to RFZ directly from the agencies
when publish it. Our docision to cut out this service has the
concurrence of HPV, and makes possible the assignment of fourteen
people alźmṁore.
2. To take the place of this staff, 10 Division proposes to
have one or as people concentrate on developing ideas and policy
and theme guidance for RFS along the lines which the DDCI has
suggested in conversation with se. One good man of necessary talent
and experience will concentrate on this full time, pulling together
matters from IY Division, State and other sources. He will continue
to give RPE such intelligence summaries aɛ can be made sterile, but
his principal task will be to ride hard generally on the HFE programs
as our chief point of information ani liaison.
Orig - Addressce
100-00
100 - 10/DO
200
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
SECRET
5.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_336.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
March 28, 1952
$
I
Dear Oliver:
Wearing my Crusade hat at this juncture, let me fill you in as best I can on
the history and development of the Crusade operating budget. This is no mean
job, since practically all of the transactions concerning it were verbal
a situation I hope to correct in the future, starting now. So here goes. I
will make the special budget the subject of a separate letter.
In December, Abbott got the General's verbal approval of a Crusade budget for
1952 of approximately $1,000,000 if Abbott would stay on. Before any progress
toward firming up this commitment had been made, difficulties arose in connection
with our position vis a vis VOA. On January 17th, CD and Abbott met with everyone
concerned in the problem in Ed Barrett's office. Out of this meeting came general
agreement that the 1952 Crusade program should be considerably reduced in scope,
which was duly reported to the Crusade Board the following day. Allen instructed
Abbott to draw up a proposed budget for something under $500,000. This Abbott
did under date of January 21st and transmitted it to Allen with a letter dated
January 23rd.
The budget submitted, which I believe is in your hands, amounted to $488,991,
covering the eleven months from February 1st to December 31st, 1952. (The
Crusade had meanwhile received on January 11th, on special request, funds covering
the months of December and Jarmary.)
It was initially contemplated that the total sum of $488,991 should be transferred
to the Crusade in a lump. It then developed that because of fiscal year problems
five-elevenths, or $222,270, would be transferred immediately.
Within a week or so from January 23rd, Abbott received telephonic approval from
Allen of the $488,991 over-all, with $222,270 to be transferred in a lump sum.
Early in February, Crusade was advised it would be more convenient for you to
transfer just the February allotment and postpone the lump sum payment until
March. On advice, we therefore made formal request for Sh1,454 for February on
February 19th. This payment was received by us on March 3rd. It is the only
installment we have received against the total (eleven-month) Crusade 1952 budget.
During my trip before last, I received verbal reassurance that the balance of
the five-month figure would be forthcoming. This then is to urge you to put
this in line for attention as soon as possible.
To recapitulate, this is a request specifically for $177,816, representing
$44,45 a month for March, April, May, and June.
Sincerely yours,
7
Leonard
D. St

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_338.jpeg ---
**
:
14-00000
:
EASY BAKER BUDGET
:
Cash balance as of March 21, 1952
1,431.91
✓
Pald expenses as of March-21
50.068.09
Total cash received against budget..
51.500.00
Committments as of March 21, 1952:
P.O. 790
45.00
#
780
30.50
"
779
37.00
749
333.20
#747
16,500.00
" 743
757.60
Robert Jordan (Dir. Church Prom.)
German Accounting #5
1,200.00
1,465.00
"
St
66
1,943.00
Total commitments
22.311.30
Total expenses and commitments
72,379.39
Total cash received on budget
51,500,00
Budget deficit as of 3/23/52
21.879.39
L

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_337.jpeg ---
14-00000
March 28, 1952
1
i
!
:
}
1
-
Dear Oliver:
This is an attempt to give you the background of our special EASY BAKER budget.
This is the balloon project, initiated last fall after the first Winds of Freedom
one and scheduled for Christmastime. It was then known as Santa Claus or SUGAR
CHARLIE. After definite cancelation for Christmas and postponement to Easter,
it became known in our accounts as Easter Bunny or EASY BAKER.
In a memorandum to John Damewood, dated becember 5, 1951, Abbott said: "Attached,
also, is request to cover costs of operation Santa Claus to date. Except for
some continuing preparations in the field, this too is being kept on ice pending
further word from you. You will recall that AWD authorized the purchase of
vehicles, etc., at our conference in his office in October. He estimated at
that time that the total project would run approximately $175,000."
Formal request to the Foundation for the $51,500 was made Jarmary 3rd, together
with request for December and January operating expenses. All these sums were
received by Crusade January 10th.
On one of Abbott's January or February trips to your city, he received a promise
to transfer to us the balance of the EASY BAKER budget ($123,500). I would
strongly recommend that this would be the neatest way of handling this account.
We naturally keep separate accounting for this budget and could give you an
accounting to date at any time on request. To make such a transfer now would
also enable you to dispose of this budget in your current fiscal year, in which
an allocation for it has presumably been made.
I should perhaps set down for the record that it cannot be guaranteed that an
EASY BAKER type operation, when and if it should be definitely put on the schedule,
can be carried off for the original budget of $175,000. There are too many
variables. And, while the major part of the budget spent or to be spent goes
for quasi capital equipment, some of it goes or will go for expendable operation
(publicity, communications, and the like) which would have to be repeated in
connection with another balloon operation.
Attached is a schedule of expenses and commitments as of March 21st against
the EASY BAKER budget. From this you will see that we have had to use general
operating funds of about $21,000 for LASY BAKER as of that date. A rough estimate
of additional costs of the prayer operation, which belongs to EASY FAKER, is
$9,500. (I also attach for your information a mimeographed report indicating
the acceptance of the prayer operation among the churches.)
To recapitulate, this is a request for transfer of the balance of $123,500 of
the EASY BAKER special budget.
Sincerely yours,
Foresed & Show

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_339.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
XXX
EXCERPTS FROM LETTERS RECEIVED IN RESPONSE TO
CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM'S SUGGESTION OF A PRAYER MOVEMENT
(Early in March the Crusade cent letters to every house of worship in
the United States, Councils of Churches, Ministerial Associations, Councils.
of Church Women, as well as to a fow national secular organizations. These
letters urged people to offer special prayers for those whose religious
freedoms have been restricted because of Communist domination. The Crusade
undertook to make known to the peoples behind the Iron Curtain this movoment
on the part of Americanc and to request their prayers for us in exchange.
The quotations herein which are of a congratulatory nature to the Crusade
are included not out of vainglory, but because they toll part of the
story: the acceptance by the First Lotate of this proposal from a lay
organization. On reflection it may be judged that only a lry organization
could successfully make such a proposal.)
IVANHOE, MINNESOTA -
"This is a step in truly proper procedure in the struggle...between
the free countries of the world and those enclaved by liarxian doctrinės
and practices. May God speed the plan."
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND
->
me feel here...that the Christian Church is in a period of greatest
opportunity in light of recent persecutions and restrictions throughout
the world. History has shorm that in periods timilar to these, the Church
has growm large enough for the tesk: ahead of it. ...prayers for there
who are under persecution and restriction throughout the world are offered...
every Sunday...
"After a full year of such a progran for the peoples of the enslaved
areas, our own people have grom more acutely conscious of the problem
facing the Christian Church. ...enlightenment upen Christianity's greatest
competitor, Communism, is necessary for those of us who are still gripped
with complacency. Eecides enlightenment, it would be of help to our orm
people that prayers and thoughts of those people tchind the Iron. Curtain
are for our strength to help them conquer their enslaving ideologies.
We will make public this letter and renew our efforts to make our
own people more conscious of the teed. Our prayers will be for the people
of the world and the persecution that they might have religious freedom
and, above all, be worthy of that freedom when it comes. Me ask their
prayers for our strengti. in a fight arainst a deadly enemy called 'complacency
and religious pride.' I would like to recall that prayer cannot be separated
from action and that our prayer is for the Crusade for Freedom and that
our action will be in helping you.”

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_341.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
f
1
!
*
-3-
DENVER, COLORADO
Wife shall be most happy in this parish to do something specific in a
spiritual way for the rectoration of freedom of religion in the satellite
countries. It will be announced to our congregation on Sunday, March 16th,
that a special Mass will be offered on the fourth Sundry of Lent, on Faralon
Sunday, on Palm Sunday and again on Easter Sunday for religious freedom
behind the Iron Curtain. .I can assure you that in this parish may hundreds
of prayers and Holy Communions will be offered to Ainighty God for our
distressed brothers and sisters behind the Iron Curtain. Cod grent that
your request will receive the response that it so richly deserves. Humblo
prayers will be more potent then the most effective bomb."
HOLYOKE, MASKACHUSETTS
"This silent prayer was inserted in our order of worship yesterday
in response to your request.
"Father, wo thank Thee for the privilege of worship, and
for the freedom to listen, to think, and to speak as Thy
Spirit directs. Nake us deeply sensitive to the sufferings
of the peoplus of Eastern Europe and of Asie, to whom this
freedom is now denied: Open their hearts and lives as well
as ours, we pray Thee, to the message of the Gospel of Christ.”
NEWCASTLE, MAINE
"I am very happy to cooperate...it is often difficult to make people
understand that...we are part of a great world moement. If only each
individual in each tiny place could and would realize he...can in a small
way further the cause of peace and justice..."
ROSEZURG, OREGON
"...our congregation has been much aware of the needs and the available
power through prayer. We shall continue to do everything we can. Thank
you for encouraging the Church people to broaden their vistes and horizons
of the prayer experience."
SPRINGFIELD CENTER, NEW YORK
sincerely trust the response to your appeal will prove so universal
that the prayers of millions of earnest and loyal Christians will prove
80 cơm diclming that with God's help we shall be miraculously successful
in bringing to ht the diabolical machinations of the godless Soviet
Tyrants..."
ļ
i
1
T

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_340.jpeg ---
14-00000
{
-2-
WESTFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS
"...hope that you will be able to get behind the Iron Curtain with the
specific information that Christian people are united in praying for this
freedom for all. It is my intention to include...a special prayer in which
the entire congregation will unite as a part of the Crusade for Freedom."
TUTTLE, NORTH DAKOTA-
"I think God for the Crusade for Freedom, and for the leaders who give
of their time and strength for such a worthy cause. I can assure you of
my support."
DRESDEN, TENNESSEE
"God grant that the common effort of all toward this campaign shall
not be in vain, but shall eventually lead to the lasting peace and freedom
that all peoples cherish so much."
CENTERLIORELAND, FENNSYLVANIA
"...pledge my support in your prayer campaign... On each Sunday special
intercession will be mado. We shall ask not only that their...freedom...
be restored but that the...gospel may make easier the burdens of oppression
which they now carry.
"Our prayers shall be with the Crusade for Freedom as it continues its
splendid efforts in behalf of a great cause. May we be always of the side
of God in the battle for right and truth."
CEDAR RAPIDS, IONA
..will begin special prayers on Sunday, March 23... By prayer, by ·
daily acts of self denial and by constant expressions of material charity,
the members of this congregation are doing, and will continue to do, every-
thing in their power to assist the Crusade. May God bless and prosper
your work."
1 :
1
MANCHESTER, GEORGIA
"It is indeed gratifying to know that there are yet God fearing mon...
who are willing under God to promote such a worthy cause as the Crusade for
Freedom. May God richly bless you and give you spiritual courage to carry
on as a clarion in this dark hour of spiritual need."

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_342.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
:
}
4.
CONCEPTION, MISSOURI
"On March 23, I shall conduct a Day of Recollection and direct
it toward the aims and purposes of the Crusade. The Seminarians
will be asked to continue their prayers on the following Sundays for
this purpose. If there is any other way in which we can be of help,
please call on us."
:
ONEONTA, NEW YORK
"It was most gratifying to learn that you ... in the Crusade for
Freedom recognize the value of prayer to the extent that you are willing
to solicit the prayers of God's people for those who are in need.
"He assured of the prayers of the members of my Church ... over
eight hundred members and myself in this worthy endeavor. I am per-
suaded that the God that controls all the wealth of this world is going
to honor you and your colleagues materially and spiritually because
of your approach to this matter."
DURANT, OKLAHOMA
"...I promise that we ... in this area will cooperate in prayers
for peace and freedom
YORK, PENNSYLVANIA
"We shall print on our Bulletin the following prayer, on the four
Sundays beginning with March 23rd, and shall ask our people to use it
es a congregation and personally. The prayer follows:
"Almighty God, Thou who are truth and love, in whom is justice,
righteousness, and liberty, we bow in sincere and earnest prayer that
Thy power may bring the blessings of full freedom to worship Thee and
serve Thee, to all Thy children who dwell in lands where men know not
this freedom. Grant unto them that through Thy grace they, and we,
may rejoice to know Thee, to worship Thee, and to serve Thee. We ask
this through Him who died that men might live in Thee, the only true
God and Father of us all. Aman."
ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO
"On Sunday, March 23rd ... will offer special prayers ... will
repeat these prayers from time to time thereafter ...”
"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_344.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 6 -
BINGHAMTON, NEW YORK plans to use the following prayer which came from
"Prayers for Men in Service";
"For the Oppressed: 0 God, The Creator of men and of nations, we
implore Thy fatherly care and protection in behalf of all Thy children
everywhere who suffer persecution. In all their trials and tribulations
be Thou their Refuge and Strength. Impart to them Thine own comfort and
courage. Turn the hearts of the oppressors from evil to good. Stop the
hands and convert the wills of those who would array brother against brother
in racial strife. Restore to all men everywhere the blessing of religious
freedom. Fill our hearts and inspire our minds with a desire firmly
to establish peace and justice, liberty and fraternity throughout the world;
for His sake, who suffered for all mankind, Thy Son, Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen."
DULUTH, MINNESOTA
"...pleased to join all Christians of this country in a Crusade for
Freedom. Daily we are praying for the restoration of religious freedom
to the peoples behind the Iron Curtain. May God bless your effort in
promoting Christian freedom and peace in this world.”
WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA
"With deep emotion we ... assure you of our wholehearted cooperation
.... Religious liberty throughout the world has long been a special in-
tention remembered here. We shall not fail to ask Him to inspire Pastors
to encourage their congregations to do all possible to cooperate."
i
CHAMBERSBURG, PENNSYLVANIA
"...it is planned in our congregation to place special emphasis in our
Sunday Bulletin on March 23 upon the matter of prayers, personal and
corporate, for restoration of religious liberties to repressed people.
We shall, also, make a personal announcement calling attention to the
printed program and trust that in this way, we may share in the 'Crusade
for Freedom. ' Your move seems to be one that should enlist the thinking
and efforts of all Christian people,”
FORT SMITH, ARKANSAS
"...we conduct a Novena here ... every Sunday night using the booklet,
'Crusade for Peace.' During this Novena we include all the intentions
of the entire world.and in a special way the intentions for your Crusade
for Freedom."

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_343.jpeg ---
14-00000
47
h'
:
BROOKLYN, NEW YORK
-5-
" I enclose a copy of a prayer
"Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, we beseech thee to bring a
righteous and just peace into our world. Cleanse the hearts of the men
of all nations of potty provincialism, of envy and of hatred and endow all
their leaders with humility and courage to know and to do thy will.
And more especially we pray for the people of Russia and their leader,
Josef Stalin, that they and he, being cleansed from False Doctrine, may
be brought to the light of thy truth and may seek peace and understanding
rather than discord and war. Grant to our own nation a deeper sense of
responsibility in using the power thou hastgiven her,
"...and enlighten those we have set in authority over us so that they
may honestly try to further thy will. Finally, we pray for thy Holy
Church. Whorever she may be, that she may be revived by thine indwelling
spirit and made the sure instrument of union for all men in our divided
world. Pardon the imperfection of this our prayer and in all things
thy will be done. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen."
:
MINONK, ILLINOIS
"Please put us down as another church with a world view and ...
a concern for religious liberty ... of our Christian brothron behind
political curtains in Europe and Asia. All good success to you in
'our' campaign to overcome evil with good, to fight the big lie of
communism with the big truth of universal freedom, freedom 'in Christ',
which we in God-blessed ¡merica so enjoy today."
FROM A CITY COUNCIL OF CHURCH WOMEN
"We rejoice in this gesture from Crusade for Freedom and join with
you in special prayers."
I
TUNICA, MISSISSIPPI
1
"We think the idea is a good one, and we shall join with you, using
the following prayer:
"O Almighty God, whom to know aright is life eternal, whom to serve
aright is perfect freedom, grant, we beseech thee, the restoration of re-
ligious freedom to oppressed peoples everywhere, but particularly to those
in the subjugated nations of Eastern Europe. Give them hope, fill them
with courage, strengthen their determination until the iron yoke of
Communism is broken by the power of Christ, in whose name we pray. Amen.
1
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_34.jpeg ---
14-00000
Tacob Healás
SECRET
RAT
7
ht

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_345.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
- 7 -
GRANVILLE, NORTH DAKOTA
"In response to your letter, I included special prayers in my pastoral
prayers today. It will be good of you to ask the peoples of Hungary,
Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and other lands under the oppression of Russia
to pray for us. We need to understand them and to receive their under-
standing. God help us all.
'
"How can we possibly retain our own freedoms unless we desire freedom
for these others? One of the greatest freedoms surely must be freedom
from self-righteousness. Will they pray for this freedom for us?
"Blessed are they who feel their spiritual need,' Goodspeed
translates it."
HOBOKEN, NEW JERSEY
"... constructive suggestion of prayer ... We will join other Christian
churches in this program. We will begin at once. Your letter will be ...
posted Prayer changes things ... Count on us."
PINE BLUFF, ARKANSAS
"Will be glad to cooperate.. Beginning Sunday, March 23 and every Sunday
thereafter the congregation will pray for your intention. ... A very
fine idea."
COLUMBUS, OHIO
"We are glad to have a chance to share in this great crusade.”
CHUCHATER, WYOMING
"...was glad to learn that the Crusade for Freedom is looking for help
to The Almighty God, and He indeed can help the people behind the Iron Curtain.
"I have been praying daily not only for my own dear ones who are behind
the Iron Curtain but for all people who are enslaved by Communists. God's
gracious Hand had lead me out from the Iron Curtain and how glad I am to
be in free America.”
PASCOAG, RHODE ISLAND
"You may include (us) ... as spiritual contributors to your worthy cause.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_346.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
- 8 -
CONVERSE, INDIANA
"My sincere congratulations and gratitude that you are presenting
the matter of united prayer for freedom ... I assure you also that I
will present the challenge ... to our people and that we'll join with
you and all churches of America in praying for the freedom that we believe
is the natural right of all mon."
ENDICOTT, NEW YORK
"Starting March 23rd we will have a public prayer every Sunday
May God bless you and your great work for freedom. I am sure that with the
prayers of Our great Nation and all Freedom-loving people, Almighty God
in his infinite goodness and love will answer our prayers and all the
things you are trying to accomplish in the Crusado for Freedan will be
fulfilled."
'
LONG BEACH, CALIFORNIA
"To establish such a prayer chain from the concerned peoples of this
nation to the concerned peoples behind the Iron Curtain, in fact, to the
Christian peoples behind any curtain in the world, will create a pool of
resources that will strike fire in the hearts of believing Christian
people. It is certainly one of the most important things to do alongside
other preparation for World Peace."
PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA
-
From a Church bulletin
1
"Beginning Sunday, March 23, and continuing, the Crusade for Freedom,
which encourages those behind the 'iron curtain' in their desperate struggle
for religious liberty, asks for our earnest prayers for those who have been
deprived of their freedom to worship according to the dictates of conscience,
PRAY."
i
34
The president of a Lutheran STATE SYNOD, in addition to acquiring newspaper
notice, wrote the following letter to his confreres;
"Dear Brethren, Seeking to abide by the request of the Crusade for Free-
dom that each church in America have special prayers beginning Sunday,.
March 23, and each Sunday thereafter for the 'restoration of religious liber-
ties to the peoples in the satellite countries of Eastern Europe,' and to
strengthen the power of praying peoples for the advancement of God's Kingdom,
I hereby request that each pastor write out a prayer that may be used in con-
junction with the General Prayer in my service each Sunday morning, and as a
special collect for the Vesper Services.
(continued)
}
}
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_347.jpeg ---
14-00000
16
CHESTER, CONNECTICUT
"In addition to making special note each Sunday morning service, we shall
see to it that some space is allotted in our monthly pastoral letter for
a suggestion of prayer for other men who are denied corporate worship.”
ELLICOTT CITY, MARYLAND
"We feel sure that they know of our concern, and we know in our hearts
they are praying that our faith fail not. Anything that the Crusade for
Freedom can do to carry the message of our continued concern, will be
appreciated."
SAN BRUNO, CALIFORNIA
"We shall be more than happy to continue to remember this great, effort
in prayer and ask God's blessing upon you who direct this undertaking,"
f
L
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF RADIO AND TELEVISION ERCADCASTERS
"The Crusade's plan for mass prayers...for the people behind the Iron
Curtain who have been denied freedom of religious worship certainly is a
commandable one. The need for faith throughout the world has never been
greater, and that there should be freedom to worship as one wishes is funda-
mental to the principles by which we in America live. Nembers of the National
Association of Radio and Television Broadcasters...will...demonstrate their
friendship for the world's oppressed people by supporting...the Crusade for
Freedom."
"
PT.
714'
PILOT CLUB INTERNATIONAL
"The Crusade for Freedom is doing a wonderful work and it is a privilege
to cooperate in every way possible."
VETERANS OF FOREIGN VARS
"As Commander-in-Chief...I happily endorse this Crusade for Freedom
movement with a pledge of our complete sympathy, cooperation and support."

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_349.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1
1
:
:
:
- 15.
-
BEAVER, OKLAHOMA
*Thanks for promoting this thought."
WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA
"Every day (we) join in prayer for Peace and the welfare of those
behind the Iron Curtain.
on this day of prayer."
... We feel privileged to join all Christians
VAUX HALL, NEW JERSEY
"It is a worthwhile gesture
We know God is pleased with it and
certainly pray that all churches will comply with this request; we cer-
tainly shall."
DENVER, COLORADO
"Our church shall gladly remember this very important program in
prayer, and we will greatly appreciate the prayers of our Christian
friends everywhere."
PIKSVILLE, KENTUCKY
*This is a very small parish, but I will urge all to cooperate in this
worthy cause. I will not exempt myself of the same obligation."
DUFFES, SOUTH DAKOTA
*... together we shall pray for our brethren who have lost their
freedom...”
BLOOMFISLD, IOWA
*Grateful to you for this move and hoping for great success
CHATTANOOGA, TENNESSES
*Kay God bless you in this effort; and those unfortunate ones for
*kay_God
whom we pray."
i
i
:
i
1
:
1
Į

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_348.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
1
- 17 -
i
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE UNITED STATES
"Frayer is a mighty force, a mighty unused power. Let us all, here
in America and elsewhere in the world put this mighty power to work."
:
AMVETS
"AMVETS wholeheartedly endorse the Crusade for Freedom sponsored movement
for mass prayers...for the people behind the Iron Curtain who have been denied
the freedom of religious worship which is the proud heritage of every American.
"There is a great need for a spiritual rebirth in this world torn with
hatred and fears. The unity of peoples under a common God will do much to wash
away the causes of unrest which haunt us today and will lead to the mutual
objectives of peace-loving people everywhere,
mie are proud to call upon our members throughout the nation to participate...
ASSOCIAT
AMERICAN DENTAL ASSOCIATION
"...the American Dental Association...endorse your plan for mass prayers...
for the people behind the Iron Curtain.
"The members of this frecciation long have supported the Crusade for Freedom
and...will be pleased to participate in this demonstration of the freedom of
religious worship."
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION TRADES DEPUITMENT - AFL
#e will send out a circular letter to our local...Councils throughout
the country asking them to join in the mass prayers..."
NEW YORK STATE BANKERS ASSOCIATION: ...pleased to cooperate...and urge our
membership to participate.....THE AMERICAN LEGION; ...your efforts will receive
our wholehearted support.....ECY SCOUTS OF AVERICA: ...joins with the Crusade...
and all religious faiths in praying.....KIMNIS INTERNATIONAL: ...a splendid
idoa.....UNITED STATES JUNIOR CHAMBER OF COLENCE: ...will certainly do every-.
thing we can...to get our organizations to assist in any way.....AMERICAN
FAR! BUREAU FEDERATION: ...sending copies of your letter to all of our state
organizations, with a note encouraging their participation.....THEATRE O..NERS
OF AMERICA: ...action on our part...will strengthen...religious frith...and
keep alive the hope of ultimate freedom from all oppression.....SUPREME LODGE
KNIGHTS OF FYTHIAS: ...your program...for mass prayers...is indeed commendable..
DIRECT MAIL ADVERTISING ASSOCIATION, INC: ...in complete accord with this
movement...
March 21, 1952

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_351.jpeg ---
14-00000
÷
$
52
23
1
1
-
- 13 -
1
:
DELCAMBRE, LOUISIANA
"That we all recognize the necessity of turning to God for help and
guidance in restoring the world to Christian ideals is the most hopeful
sign of the times."
HOUSTON, TEXAS
"There is power in prayer. Our congregation will join you and others
in your prayer plan, ..."
LAWRENCE, KANSAS
"... beginning March 23 we shall make special mention in the morning
bulletin and give definite place in the program for the fellowship of
prayer."
SOUTH CAYUGA, ONTARIO
"... let me assure you that wo are with you in this great Crusade
of Prayer."
LAKELAND, FLORIDA
*... want to encourage you in your Crusade for Freedom, and remind
you that we who are of grass roots ... are ringing the bell."
ROCK HILL, SOUTH CAROLINA
"I think this is a very fine thought and trust that ministers and con-
gregations throughout our nation will undergird your labors with prayer
and faith."
FROM AN ARCHDIOCESS
"In conformity with the request of the Crusade for Freedom we are asking
all the Catholic Churches in the Archdiocese to continue to recite prayers
for those ... under Communist domination."
MT. GILEAD, NORTH CAROLINA
"We will join in the continuing prayer for Religious Freedom.#

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_350.jpeg ---
14-00000
₤1
- 24-
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
"It is a pleasure to cooperate in your request for prayers starting
Sunday, March 23. In fact, we will start tomorrow ... God bless you
and your confreres in your work."
OSHKOSH, NEBRASKA
"I appreciate your getting word to them of our interest in their
welfare, and believe that such a plan is a real forward step ..."
CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA
"... our church will gladly join you in praying for these our brothers
and sisters. I am glad to know that you consider prayer as having a major
place in the affairs of the world. ...
NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA
"Congratulations upon your forward step in seeking cooperation and free-
dom through prayer. You may count on us and our two churches ..."
M
PEABODY, KANSAS
7
i
:
==>
"We shall take this mattor seriously and make it a definite part of the
Horning Worship Period ... we shall make PRAYERS FOR FREEDOM a part of our
thought."
ASHVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA
"The student body ... enthusiastically endorse your plan for special
prayers ... and will not only participate themselves but will do everything
in their power to increase the knowledge of the movement and gain widest
participation from others."
PUTNEY, VERMONT
"The students ... wish to join in this crusade. Beginning on Sunday,
March 23, we shall say each day a decade of the Rosary for the intentions
you recommand.”
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_352.jpeg ---
14-00000
j
- 12 -
BUNKER HILL, INDIANA
"This world under God can have a new birth of freedom by the vory
method you are suggesting. Praying for each other is the real method
to bring our world out of its darkness and fear,”
BROKEN BOW, NEBRASKA
"Our morning congregation ... voted almost unanimously to share your
prayers for the peoples in the satellite countries ..."
:
MILLVILLE, NEW JERSEY
"I presented the matter to my congregation ... and our people pledge
their prayers beginning with Sunday, March 23, to the oppressed peoples ...m
NEW YORK, NEW YORK
... moet happy to cooperate. May God bless you and your associates with
wisdom and insight as you strive to free both the bodies and the minds of
the people from dictatorships of all kinds."
BIRCHWOOD, WISCONSIN
"Realizing the importance of this work, I do promise to ask the con-
tinuing prayers of our people for all our brothers and sisters in Christ
who are presently suffering raligious persecation.”
SPOKANE, WASHINGTON
"Be assured we are most happy to join in this crusade of prayer on week
days as well as on Sundays.”
PETOSKEY, MICHIGAN
"... Ministerial Association in meeting on March 10 voted to have its
Secretary send you jord that x will continue our support of your program
as in the paz^! ebning with March 23, we will make sure that prayers
are given in each arch,"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_354.jpeg ---
14-00000
÷ 10
MANHASSET, NEW YORK
"Your challenge to pray for those who have been deprived of their
spiritual freedom is timely and greatly needed. The religious liberty
which we enjoy in America should be a cherished heritage, and one which
we seek to share with the peoples of the world. I trust that the Crusade
for Freedom will be successful in many parts of the world.”
DUBLIN, TEXAS
i
"I think this is a most worthy and wise enterprise, and I wish for
it the greatest succes8. I am greatly interested in the world situation
and think there ought to be done much more concerted praying in the
nation today. I see little hope for us otherwise."
WATERFORD, VIRGINIA
"We promise to join you in special prayers for them beginning Sunday,
March 23rd, and shall continue praying until these people are granted
religious liberty. Thank you for your interest. May God crown your
efforts with succes8 -- and soon."
BURLINGAME, CALIFORNIA
"We will remember them in our prayers particularly on March 23rd ...”
JOHN DAY, CREGON
"...we will be very glad to do our share ...”
LEAVENWORTH, KANSAS
"The world needs a greater faith in God today and all religious leaders
should have a part in this prayer effort."
BRISTOL, VIRGINIA
"We shall not only support this Crusade in our own church but also expect
to sponsor, special radio programs over our best radio station. Be assured
of our interest and prayers.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_353.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
->>
- 11 -
COLLEGEVILLE, MINNESOTA
"I endorse most heartily your Crusade for Freedom
it will receive an enthusiastic response throughout America."
and hope that
GIBON, NORTH CAROLINA
"I shall count it a privilege to call upon my people to pray thus,
and will myself make this an object both of my personal prayers and those
made publicly."
LIBERTY, MISSOURI
"May God bless you and your earnest efforts for these people.
we have a family in our church who were D.P.'s and whon our people have
helped. They are ... proving well worth any help and prayer. Therefore,
we are close to this problem and understand it somewhat. God guide you
and may He give to these wounded and gentle poople their freedom again."
MONROE, LOUISIANA
"Our people are sharing in the Crusade for Freedon by prayer for
our friends behind the Iron Curtain as well as for the forces of
righteousness engaged in the propagation of the Truth ...”
ADA, OKLAHOMA
"In my judgment this is one of the most real ways in which Christians
can combat the menace of communism in our world."
GREEN SPRINGS, OHIO
"Thank you for inviting the people of our churches to share in the
special prayers ... we are happy to have a part in this great Christian
enterprise. Yes, and in turn we will be glad to have the Crusade ask
these people for their intercessory prayers for us. Surely God will
bless this concern."
ELGIN, ILLINOIS
"May. God multiply and fulfill your greatest hope and prayers, in which
I shall be led to join."

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_355.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
to what to
- 9 -
(continued)
"Hoping that you will comply with my request and the request of the
Crusade for Freedom to remember at the Throne of Grace, those whose
opportunities to worship our God and Father, are not as great as those
of the peoples of America,
I am,
Yours in the Master's Service ...m
COLUMBUS, GEORGIA
"We shall pray, as you suggested, during these ... meetings, during
the pastoral prayers, and 'at' other services in our church. You are
on the right track. God will richly bless your efforts, the prayers
of the peoples of the world."
CINCINNATI, OHIO
"The
...
will
boys and young men preparing for the priesthood
be glad to join with thousands, and I hope millions, of other spiritual-
minded Americans in praying."
NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA
"You may be assured that you will have our prayers for all the
things which the Crusade for Freedom is endeavoring to accomplish."
MINISTERIAL ASSOCIATION, INDIANA
"We, are grateful for this opportunity to express our conviction that
this spiritual relationship between peoples is a vital part of the progress
toward freedom."
BISHOP, TEXAS
"There are many Catholics in the satellite countries behind the Iron
Curtain. They will understand this language. which simpler still, if you
only let then know that here in this parish of Mexican farm-laborers as in
mary another Catholic church in America we are forverously trying to put
into action the peace plan of Our Lady of Fatima. I am sure they will be
greatly comforted by this message."

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
MONA
1
7
Q'
ke
120
3000
Paul Andr
70
200
23040

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_356.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
|
:
!
i
4134
MATION
SECRET
Hr. John C. Hughes,
c/o McCampbell & Co.,
40 Worth Street,
New York 13, New York.
Dear Johns
My promised thoughts on a matter of our mutual concern,
raised in your 28 January letter, are given in the duclosed
cory of a letter being sent concurrently to Min Miller. You
vill moto from the enclosure that Min knows we are forwarding
you a copy of the letter to him. Min will certainly welcome
your advice in planning the approach to the Defense Depart-
ment. While the Director and I should, of course, like very
much to assist in the effort to obtain the directive from
Defense which Eucos explained to Lang was necessary, ve
feal that, for reasons of security, we should not do no
initially and, for the same reason, we would rather have you
carry the ball all the way, if possible.
Min will undoubtedly keep us both advised of such efforts
as he and lang shall plan, and if in the course of their
megotiations, an opportunity presents itself for either the
Director or me to be of assistance, you ino that you may
count on us to do 80. A copy of this letter is also attached,
in case you have an opportunity to hand it tɔ Hin.
My kindest personal regards to you.
Attachments 2
As stated above
CIO/NEView (date ?;
Distribution:
Addressee original and /
DECI
ER -
->>
1
CIO - 1
RI - 2
1'
Sincerely,
Aller W. Dulles
SECRET
"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_359.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
- 2 -
B
5
mental agencies might receive concerning use of balloons would be answered
to the effect" that the matter is under continuous study by agencies of the
Government but disclosure of results at this time would not be in the public
interest."
3. A perusal of the NPSB minutes since June 1951 did not indicate
further consideration by that group of the subject of balloons. From this
we must infer that CIA still bears the responsibility of the commitment
made by Mr. Wiener for procurement.
t
4. For your information this research and development has been con-
ducted for CIA by General Milla with ONR serving as the cut-out. An existing
project "Skyhook" which ONR had with General Mills was accelerated to cover
development of leaflet balloons continued along with ONR's program of commic
ray research. We/öbligated to ONR to deny a newspaper access to these
drawings, specifications, movies and reports which bear a SECRET classification.
5. I might make one small suggestion that since Mr. Blair Moody is
now a Senator and running for re-election in the next election, it might be
possible to solicite his aid in bringing Mr. Scripps in line with adopted
policy regarding balloons should it become necessary.
¡
I
i
i
:
1
1
}
i
CONFIDENTIAL
ROSALYN J. SMITH
+223

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_357.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
:351',
350 FREE
1
__L.
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS.—Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn
across sheet and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial
(check mark insufficient) before further routing. This Record and Routing Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
SAR/ R.J. Smith
TO-
1.
ROOM
NO.
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
ALCFIVED
FORWARDT
K
Spe/Von Kann 2044
2.
C-PY
Cio
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
3.
10.
11.
12.
13.
NO
DATE
27 March 1952
COMMENTS
29 March 52
29MUR
MARV
Dailey phoned me about this case a
day or so ago and it seems that there
is considerable pressure abuilding
on the part of Mr. Scripps to be al-
lowed to use the large balloons
overtly. He is hoping to be able to
get an answer to these people prior
to the April 2nd meeting. Whether
this is possible or not, I do not
know.
It may be that this question must be
raised again with the POCC since they
were in on it at the beginning. AC-
tually this may be an opportunity to
have some overt agency do a job for
us and the request should be evaluated
on that basis.
4.03
mall, of
0
VK
discussed infor.
PS.B Lunchan
Morise
Movel 17th
Duilts. Wishin. Falt. Sergeant
Breush
plant,
Barnes
EXT 765
-
Allen
51-9
FREE
RESTRICTED
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_360.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
CONFIDENTIAL
RECORD SHEET
ROUTING AND RECORD
bp/7359
1
INSTRUCTIONS Officer designations (sce separate sheet) should be used in the "To" column.
Under each comment a line should be drawn across sheet and each comment numbered to correspond
Each officer should initial check mark insufficient)
with the number in the "To" column.
before further routing. This Record and Pouting Sheet should be returned to Registry.
ACCESSION NO
FROM:
RDD/TSS
TO
ROOM NO.
DATE
RECEIVED
FORWARDED
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
2044
K.
MAR 26 19521
Col. Vonkann
2
SAR
Col Von Kann
10
I
12.
13.
-
DATE RECEIVED IN S A.
COMMENTS
.
u
Rometh
It
Attached is the Memorandum for the
Record mentioned in our telephone
Miscussion 25 March 1952. Drawing:
and specifications of this item
are in the possession of RDD,
although the information is also
on hand at General Millo.
carries a SECRET classification
under our contractual arrangements
with the U. S. Navy. Questions:
1. Doce CIA still have the
commitment made by Mr. Wisner
to the National Psychological
Strategy Board for procuring
1,000 of these balloon units
for stockpile and use by any
agency deemed advisable by
that group?
2. Should RDD release the SECRET
drawings and specifications,
movies and reports on trial
operations for use by the
Detroit News?
L. R. Dailey
* 40.
SEP 1964
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_358.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
SECURLY MAGNATION
27 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: SPC
SUBJECT:
Leaflet Balloons for use in Paychological Warfare
:
1. On at least four occasions Mr. William Scripps, Detroit News,
directly or indirectly has approached the Government with proposals for
utilization of balloons for psychological warfare. Following is a list
of the dates and method of these approaches:
a.
12 October 1950 - Letter from General W. J. Donovan to DCI
enclosing "Operation Ballast." On 1 November 1950 William H. Jackson
responded to this memorandum to the effect that this suggested opera-
tion was being referred to the appropriate parsons and suggesting a
subsequent meeting with Donovan to discuss this and other matters.
b. In November 1950 as we were undertaking planning for develop-
ment of balloons with General Mills, we were informed that Mr. Scripps
planned a general meeting to be held in Washington to discuss balloons.
Through the Genoral Mills Washington Representative Mr. Scripps was
persuaded to keep his meeting general and was informed that the various
agencies of the Government had the matter under consideration and
considered that it would not be in the public interest at this time
to disclose the nature of their findings. Consequently, Mr. Scripps
forwarded us on 1 December 1950 a proposal "The Use of Free Balloons
for Load Carrying Purposes" which we acknowledged on 11 December 1950.
On December 26, 1950 General Smith received a letter from
Blair Moody summarizing a suggestion from Mr. William Scripps for
encouraging defection of Chinese Communist troops. A routine response
to his letter was sent 6 January 1951 from Mr. Jackson. I believe
also Mr. Moody called upon the Director in early February of 1951 to
discuss use of balloons for psychological warfare. ADFC addressed a
briefing memorandum to DCI on 12 February 1951, Subj: Balloons for
Carrying PW Material to Soviet Areas.
C.
2. In September 1950 the NPSB requested that CIA should represent all
interested agencies of this Government and should accordingly take steps
to develop, procure and stockpile an appropriate number of scientifically
designed balloons for future propaganda use in conditions of international
emergency. At meetings of the NPSB on 13 February 1951 and 11 June 1951
it was agreed that OPC would procure and stockpile 1,000 large leaflet
balloons for use by the appropriate agency when and if such use was
authorized. The Board also agreed that inquiries which the various govern-
CORMBENTIAL
mental agencies

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_361.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
00: land
Mr. F. B. Jovett, Jr.
C. B. Moore
TELEPHONE CALLS, WILLIAM SCRIPPS, DETROIT NEWS
3/18/52
CONFIDENTIAL
On † March, Willian Scripps of the Detroit News, called and asked for price
estimate in lots of 100,000 of a carrier balloon system which would carry
300 pounds great distances. On discussion, it appeared that ho vas ir.-
terested in something equivalent to our interin system, so I told him we had
made a quotation on such a piece of equipment in quantities for prices in the
range of $350 a unit. This piece of equipment under the expected wind con-
dition, should carry 150 pounds 1500 miles and deliver it with the best possible
accuracy from a balloon vehicle.
I asked him if he wanted specifications, but he said he would get these later.
He was working with a group who would use them to carry propaganda, and he would
see us in two weeks, and then would discuss and obtain exhibits, It was pointed
out to him that this equipment and polyethylene were well controlled by the
government. This appeared to be no problem to him.
Scripps called again on 18 March, and asked if we could attend a luncheon in
Detroit Wednesday noon, the 2nd of April, and then go on to New York for a
luncheon Thursday no. He asked that we bring along data, cost estimates,
exhibits, and all sales data, as well as movies, to this meeting. I asked if
this had been cleared with Abbott's friends, and he didn't appear to know what
I was talking about. I told him that some clearance would have to be obtained
before either the gear was shown, or before it would be permitted to leave the
country. Scripps is most enthusiastic about support forthcoming to carry such
an operation forward, and felt that the State Department would interpose no
objections for the program planned.
Scripps asked that we confirm on 19 Harch whether or not you and I would be
able to attend. This I promised to do. I would also like your guidance as
to what course should be pursued in this. It is believed that certainly Dailey
or Gates Lloyd should be made aware of this effort, so that we may deport
ourselves accordingly. Incidentally, Devey and Almy will be at both meetings,
in New York and Detroit. Upon asked if we had any objections, I said, "Or
course not.
7
CBM :he
cc: J. R. Unith
G. O. Haglund
CONFIDENTIAL
2016
44
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_364.jpeg ---
1
14-00000
I
-
3
->
:
6. On 28 January. John Hughes wrote a letter to Mr. Dulles
asking CIA's view of the problem of the evacuation of RFE employees
in Munich and elsewhere in the event of war. He said he thought
this problem was extremely important and there had been no answer
to the letter.
Action
This Division received, this letter last week and we are working
Meantime I suggest Mr. Dulles sign the attached note to John
on it.
Hughes.
Attachment
Draft ltr to John Hughes.
CIO: TWB/eh
Tamas m
W. Braden
MW
THOMAS W. TRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
•
**
H
Orig
-
DDCI (thru DD/P & ADPC)
2 cc
2 cc
-
->
CIO
RI
SECRET
**

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_36.jpeg ---
145
14-00000
2
30
308
102
3:00
200
$600
**
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_365.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
r
LUDES
SECURITY INFORMATION
5945
LAW
2742
27 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Assistant Director for Policy Coordination
SUBJECT:
Crusade for Freedom
Today the Director discussed with Kr. Henry Ford, II the
possibility of his assuming the Chairmanship of the Crusade
for Freedom next year. I understand that Mr. Ford is warm.
Jon
Vau
Braden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET
¡
•
t
'
T
$

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_362.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECR
SATION
1
27 March 1952
MER.ORANDUM FOR: Assistant Director for Policy Coordination
SUBJECT:
Deputy Director (Plans)
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Conversation with Admiral Hillor
12-7673
ty D DCI
}
Done
I shall make a practice of bringing to your attention current
matters for discussion between Admiral killer and me, the first of
which took place today and covered the following itoms:
1. At the suggestion of Bob Lang, seconded later by NCFE' c
Chairman, Joseph Grew, Admiral Miller wants to hold at the Princeton
Inn on the 10th and 11th of May a general discussion of United States
policy toward Iron Curtain countries, with particular emphasis upon
what now lines, if any, Radio Free Europe should take. The background
of this, according to Admiral Miller, is that Lang and others within
RFE feel that the time is running out behind the Iron Curtain, that
the people are ready for revolution and that we cannot continue much
longer the "hold everything" line. They want to gather a group of
experts, including lessrs. Wisner and Bulles, to discuss what policy
we should now adopt.
Action
I see no reason why we shouldn't have such a general bull session
and I will not attempt to discourage it unless instructed.
2. Admiral Miller recently had a talk with Frank Altschul who
complained somewhat of his treatment at the hands of NCE and CIA,
saying that he had never even had so much as a word of thanks for
the work he did. Miller suggested that the end might want to write
, such a letter and that, if so, a similar letter should go to Dewitt
foole.
Action
For the DDCI to write a letter might be a little of thanking
himself since he was engaged in the Altschul regime in the New York
operation. I therefore suggest that the DD/P, when he finds an
carly opportunity to write to Altschul on some matter, mention his
gratitude.
SECRET
V
-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_363.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
;
8
?
-
2
-
3. Hiller hopes that no decision has been made to put Admiral
Kirk and his Committee for the Liberation of the Russian People
under Crusade for Fredon coves. He thinks this would be a great
mistake because it would further straten the already too thin cover
of the Crusade and no further that if it has to be done, no
cannot agree that the Crutade effort would be lessened according
to the agreement with the State Department.
Action
I understand that subsequently Amiral Miller talked to ir. Fulles
who made it clear thai no uscision had been made to put Admiral Kirk
and in Committee under the Crasace but that wn here in CIA would
much appreciate it if I could be its way clear to doing so.
Admiral Killer agreed that no would take the matter up with the Board
of Directors and if they were favorably inclined, CA would take up
with State the possibility of amending to some extent the decision
to cut down on the Crusade in order is try to furnish better cover
for this operation.
4.
Admiral Miller said that Landowsky and Ranft were still in
Greece, that the situation was impossible and that one of them must
50. He said that is advice from ob Lang was that the NCFE man was
the better of the two and therefore should be Landowsky who must
80.
Action
The history of this problem in involved and long. Landowsky
has been called home, however, and will not go back to Crece co
that it no longer remains a problem. I have told Admiral Miller.
5. Admiral Miller has been talking to the ford Foundation on
the subject of the Hildebrand operation in Lerlin. The Foard had
taken a din view on the accountings, a nator which no straightened
out by promising better ones. Ford raised the question of whether
or not NCPE wanted Ford to spend the actional 50,000 pledged after
the payments of the present 250,000 eight months from now. C. D.
Jackson was present at this meeting and told ford he did not feel
the operation was worth an additional $50,000. Hiller served
Judgment, aowever. Ho wanted to know whether CIA wished him to hold
Ford to its pledge of an additional $50,000 or not.
Action
I have checked this with the EC Division, which has cabled the
field and come to the view that this operation is still very important.
They want to urge Admiral Hiller to hold Ford w its agrement. I
passed this on to Admiral Miller.
SECRET
☑

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_366.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
In reply refer to: W-1939
26 March 1952
Dear Mint
A little incident has caused a bit of trouble and a flurry of
cables here that I think you can correct very quickly. Spencer
Phenix's assistant, Mr. Hiller, has written to Leon Dennen telling
Dennen that Miller has been called in by our shop and questioned in
detail about recent Dennan accounting.
hilether or not he was questioned in detail is a matter on which
be and I might disagree but is really of no consequence since the
accounting by Dennen should normally go through us to Millar, and I
think you would agree that we had a right to ask questions about it.
that bothers me a little, however, is Miller's writing to Pennon,
giving details of how our two offices work together. Dennen, it
turns out, was annoyed by the content of Killer's letter, not so
mach at Killer as at us. His annoyance is misplaced but if there
had been no mention ty Killer of details of our relationship there
would have been no annoyance.
I presume you know of Dennen's close affiliation with Lovestone
and the possibility that this mall thing will reverberate around
and around the usual vicious circle. Can you explain to Killer how
these little incidents can get blown up into big issues and ask him
to use a little more discretion in the future?
Sincerely,
Oliver E. Hadwood
Admiral H. B. Miller
National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc.
110 N. 57th Street
New York 19, New York
40: TWEsch
Oris
->
Addresses
1 cc - Executive Off.
->
20 -
10-
RI

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_369.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECAL
SECURITY IN
MEMORANDUM FORT CHUP PINANCE DIVISION
BULJECT:
TPTONIC and TPIEDIC
25 March 1952
It is requested that the $4,000,000 revolving fund for
TPTONIC be replenished by a total of £1,302,00¼ to cover
diaburements from TPREDIO to TPTONIC under date of 18 March
1952 in the amounts of 1924,504 and 1377,500. Nocalpts for
these disvuressanta from TITONIC are being forwarded to the
Finance Iávizion, attention Fr. Edhmard Downey, this date,
under separate cover.
Approveds
QPONGE S. BUEMER
Chief
Peychological Staff Divizion
Theme W. Bredan
Chief, International Organisations Division
PY/Exo/REM/PAM¡mb
Distribution:
Addresses - Orig & 2
CPT - 1
CIO =
RI
2
-
✓
PI/Exp - 1
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_370.jpeg ---
**** 14.
*
14-00000
t
: t
R
In reply refer to:
25 March 1932
MIMMORANTAJE :
SUBJECT:
Assistant Director for Folicy Chordination
Deputy Director (Flans)
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Attached Lotter from Spencer Feriz
Executive Registry
-
2-71/87
Noted by D/DCL
4/14/5.6
Attached is a letter from Spencer Inenix to Ech Lang in
which Phenix details the story of his efforts to reach agreement
with the German authorities on the status of IGE Lader sac new
post-II 00 government. I would judge that Spencer nas done a
wonderful job to date and that things are on the track, but I
think you would be interested in reading his letter and the
second attachment, which is the matorandum of underatancing
with the German Government on which he is now working.
Attachment
Ltr 3 Mar 52 to Bob Lang.
haver Beden
how
THOMAS M. PRATEN
Chief
International Organizations vision
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_368.jpeg ---
14-00000
J
SECURITY INFOS
SECRET
▸
25 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: FE–2
SUBJECT:
WE-3
Establishment of a "Propaganda Section" in
SHAPE under Control of an Hungarian Refugee.
-2-7450
Summarized below is a report from a reliable source in
Paris with regard to the reported establishment under the control
of an Hungarian refugee of a "propaganda section" in SHAPE:
"The first rumors are somewhat vague with regard to
a new propaganda service which will be established
in Eisenhower's Headquarters. It is a SuŢremo
Direction of propaganda as was the case during the
last war.
This service will comprise military sections
for propaganda on the other side of the Iron Curtain
including parachute activities; also soctions for
• classic propaganda.
.
"According to source'e information, the head of the
section for the countries of Eastern Europe will be Mr.
Mihaly Zoldheyli, an Hungarian who is a Colonel of the
Reserve in the French Army. Mr. Zoldheyli, about 50 years
old, has had an interesting career. He left Hungary
after the first revolution, he lived several years in
the United States, he enjoyed, as a socialist, support
of American labor, and it was at their initiative that
he joined the front in Spain. Of the left, but anti-
Communist, he was one of the chiefs under the pseudonym
of Genaral Cantiago. Returning to France he was interned,
then liberated from the camp at the personal intervention
of Jules Moch, a leading French socialist politician
(recently Minister of Defense). Under the parudonym of
Major Michel, he was one of the heroes of the anti-Nazi
resistance in Southern France. He appeared to be the
only officer in the French Army who did not have French
nationality. He is married to a Frenchwoman and has one
child. He now works in Paris in the office of the Force Ouvriere.
He appears to be a man of confidence to both the Americans
and the French."
;
COI
ADPC
DD/P
DUCI
Ellen stere
ELLEN STERN
IO
¦
}
1
I
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_367.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
12-2486
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" colurnn. Under each comment a line should be drawn across short
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
TO
ADPC
DD/P
J.
DDCI
4.
CIO
ROOM
RSC D
DATE
MAR 29 1952
2
Col. Taylor april
6.
C10
7.
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
1954 A PAT-75
11 april cors
1/44
NO.
05441 31/7347
DATE
77 March 1952
COMMENTS
I am attaching a memorandum which
I received today, the subject of
which may be of general interest
to you.
Noted by 0,00I
4/4/32.
RWB
Thayer for
Mr. Dulles suggests sexeding
this to Thayer for comment
REL
8.
8.
10.
11.
12.
13.
15.
FORM NO. 81-10
FEB 1990
SECRET
P-2165

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_371.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
Paris, March 3, 1952
Dear Bob,
I have not done much reporting on our Ger en
negotiations for several reasons; first, there was not
much to report and, second, whatever there was Dick Condon
undertook to forward from Munich. I did write C.D. a
couple of letters outlining our delays and some of our un-
certainties, and last week I cabled him that I would send
a more detailed narrative when I got to Paris. As he is
now technically no longer President of NCFE, and as. Admiral
Miller may not have been completely informed of all thatu
are trying to do, I am addressing this to you, with copy to
each of them.
In the first place, let me say that progress
during the last half of last week was surprisingly speedy
and encouraging. There are still any opportunities for
the well known #slip Itwixt the cup and the lip", and local
German political considerations could rear their ugly heads
at any moment. I think it must also be understood that, as
Dick Condon puts it, no matter how many nor how good written
agroements we may have covering our operations, the whole
RFE enterprise in Germany will have to be played pretty much
by ear once the contractual agreements take effect. I regard
this, however, as an inescapable risk, and I mention it now
only to emphasize the paramount importance of the utmost care
in programming and in conduct to void a boror which could
upset our entire apple-cart. The very favorable report which
your friend Asher Lee made after his hurried inspection of
Munich underlines the need for regular spot check on program
output to avoid howlers, and the need for this once our
relationship with the Germans is no longer through the Occu-
pation Authorities or HICOG is even more imperative.
Dick Condon sent you from Munich the text of the
proposed Bundespost license which we agreed on with Dr.
Schuster on Fouruary 19, 1952, and this should long since
have reached you.
Our Bonn ne otiations resulted in the acceptance
of this text, with two exceptions;
1)
You
Sub-clause 2 of Article II is eliminated.
will rescaber that the Bundespost wished to
insert a provision authorizing license cancellation if RPE
should broadcast anything which it will be the opinion of
the Federal Government that the transmissions will prejudice

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_372.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2
the interest of the Federal Republic". We objected to this
on two grounds;
a)
b)
that such provision had no logical place in
a technical license, and
that it made or position far too precarious
since it exposed us to license cancellation
practically at the whim of any German bureau-
crat,
and we persuaded Dr. Schuster to leave it out of the license
and let us discuss the problem at Bonn. At Bonn, we vere
fortunately able to persuade the Forelin office officials
that such a provision had no technical place in the license,
and that whatever should be said on the subject should be
said in an exchange of letters, or the equivalent, batwaon
the Foreign Office and ourselves. Accordingly, Article II
now contains but one clause.
2)
Question was raised by the Foreign Office
officials at Bonn regarding the length of the
license. The text Dick sent you provides for validity until
August 31, 1960. The reason I chose that date was that it is
the expiration date of our lease on the Holzkirchen trans-
mitter site, and I thought that if arbitrary term were to
be fixed that tying it in with the Holzkirchen lease gave it
a plausibility which would help acceptance - and that proved
to be the case so far as the Bundespost was concerned
The Foreign office people told us, however, that
numerous questions had been seked in the Bundestag regarding
RPE and its programs, and that for the Government to give us
a license for as long as eight years would cause serious
criticism. We are a peculiar sort of animal, anyway, and
for our irregular activities to be blessed with such long
term approval would, they thought, be unvise for both their
and our points of view. Accordingly, they suested a four-
year period; I countered with five, dating from the date of
license issuance which (since it cannot take place before
the contractual agreements become effective, may well be late
in 1952) will give us considerably more than five years life
expectancy. My own feeling; is that if we have not done our
job within five years, we might as well pull down the shade
and go home, In any case, my counter proposal was, I said,
accepted, and Article III of the license will now read;
*
"This license shall be valid for a period
of five years commencing with the date of
its issuance and will be automatically
extended thereafter from year to year unless
written notice of ter ination is given by
one party to the other not less than 90 days
prior to the next expiration date,”

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_373.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
So much for the license, the terms of which were
shown to our HICOG friends and regarded by them as highly
favorable.
->>
-
Our political discussions suffered from a variety
of frustrations. We agreed on the license terms with the
Bundespost on February 19th, and an appointment was made for
us to see Dr. Leni the official to whom Doctor Adenauer
had referred our problems at noon on Thursday, February 21,
1952. Dick and I, therefore, took an early train from
Frankfort and were mot at the Bonn station by Fritz Kempner
who told us that the appointment had been cancelled as Dr.
Lenz had been called to the Chancellery on an urgent matter.
Fritz said that he had been told that if we went to Dr.
Lenz's office, his assistant would make a definite appoint-
ment for us later. Va did this, and were received by a smooth
and non-committal individual, who said he would not be in
touch with Dr. Lenz until nine o'clock that evening, and could
not make any definite dato until after he had spoken with
Lenz.
wa
I had the very uncomfortable feeling that we were
being given a run-around, and Fritz was very much annoyed.
We finally got the young chap to agree that he would try to
reach Lenz before evening, and that we would tolethone him
during course of the afternoon to know what information he
had been able to obtain. We telephoned repeatedly, but the
answer was always the same "nothing to report". Dick and I,
therefore, took the train back to Frinkfort, while Fritz
stayed in Bonn and, in the evening, he telephoned that he had
finally got some information from Lenz' young assistant that
Lenz had turned the entire matter over to a regular Foreign
Ofrice official nazed Strohm, and that we vere to make arran-
gements to see Strohm. Fritz said that he has endeavored to
do this, but had been told by strohn's office that he could
not be sure to see us until Thursday, the 28th, although
Vednesday, the 77th, was a slight possibility.
As I think I wrote C.D., the Fasching celebrations
were reaching their climax over that weekend, and the first
two days of the next work, and I have no doult that Strohm's
unavailability was, to a certain extent, related to Fasching.
z
Fritz said that during his visit to the Forei n office build-
ing he noticed that the rooms were all decorated with Fa ching
decorations, so that even the highest officials apparently
tske Fasching seriously. Not wanting to make another fruit-
less trip to Bonn, I decide: we would accept Strohm's appoint-
ment for Thursday, February 28th.
At 10.30 AM on Thursday, February 28th, Dick, Fritz
and I presented ourselves at Strohm's office. Ye were mot
by a sober and not too effusive individual, named Bruckner,
who informed us that, unfortunately, Dr. Strohm had been
called away from his office, that he would return as soon as

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_37.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
2002
2001
760
IGNATURA
wall Islan
k
+

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_376.jpeg ---
14-00000
Ministries of the German Government.
1
+ 6.
Item (c), obviously, was intended to cover particu-
larly the question of visus for Poles now in London who had
been recruited for program work in "unich. In our talks on
Thursday, Strohm had promised to facilitate the entry of
these Poles, and said that if Dick would end in their names,
birth dates and any other identifying inforation we had he
would instruct the German Consul in London to issue the
visas, ami that general instructions would, if we wished, be
sent out to the effect that possession of an employment letter
from NCFE would be sufficient justification for the issuance
of a visa, subject only to the .curity question. On that
point, Strohm expressed the wish that our recruits be screened
for us by CIC. We pointed out the impracticability of this.
I call your particular attention to the language
of the two full paragraphs on pake 3. This was very carefully
devised, and I am convinced that it is more favorable to us
than we had any reason to expect. As I told you, Rober
accepted it with the single change mentioned above. Nelson
and Thurston thought it excellent, and Charley Lowis, to whom
I showed it Friday, said it was "the optimum",
The Gorrans had indicated a desire for some kind
of a pre - scrutiny of our programs to avoid political con-
rlict. This would, of course, have fatally crippled our
effectiveness, so the languide that I drafted was drafted
for the purpose of emphasizing the post-broadcast nature
of any German scrutiny. In order to avoid frivolous com-
plaints from any German official, I stipulated that any
protest must reach NCFE through the Foreign office. This,
also, places NCFE in a position to put any such controversy
before the State Department, and if the issue involved is a
substantial one to have a State do the necessary vis-a-vis
the Foreign office. Ir, notwithstanding the Ger an protest, and
notwithstanding the intervention of the State Department,
should the latter wish to become involved, RFE continued to
violate the Gorman request, I phrased the next step as in-
volving the surrender by us of the license rather than its
cancellation. This may be a fine point, but I felt it inter-
posed one more step between the fall of the guillotine axe
and the drop ing of the head in the basket. I found, to my
relief, that the u of the Portuguese formula, nately, the
filing of the broadcast tapes for thirty days to per-it
examination by the Germans was a co-pletely acceptable device,
and you will note that I cases this procedure on the desirabl-
lity of providing a "ractual basis for the consideration of
any question".
We left with Fr. Stroha a copy of this retorandus
of understanding, and he undertook to prepare and forward to
me in Paris a draft of a letter 'incorporating our agrement
as set forth in the menorandum, with the no ifications out-
lined above, which the Forain office would be prepared

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_375.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
i
ļ
'
i
very well offer to give us something we had not asked for,
and we, the New York State Corporation, could hardly demand
certain rights from the German Government.
u
Nothing that we vero able to compose satisfied my
requirements until shortly before midnight theum of a new
fortula, namely, a memorandum of understanding between me,
representing NCFE, and Dr.
(whether Strohm, Lenz,
or Hallstein -which I do not know) representing the German
Government, could be initialed and made the basis for agree-
ment. This formula broke the mortal log-jam, and we did a
paper, a copy of which is enclosed.
Friday morning, we went back to HICOO, Pick typed
the manuscript which Frite and I had prepared, and we took
a copy in to Sam Reber. Sam rulsed m few questions which
we were easily able to answer, made one suggestion, namely,
the insertion of the word "basic" in the 8th line on page
then expressed himself as completely antisfied, He pttached
the very greatest imp rtance to getting from the Command the
endorsement or RFE's objectives, which they had given to us
orally and which we expressed in the paragraph commencing at
the bottom of page 2. He thought we would have accomplished
the almost impossible if we obtained such written endorse-
ment.
From HICOG we went direct to Dr. Strohn's office,
showed him the memorandum (Fritz had net had time to prepare
a German translation and we were afraid this might melay
matters, but strohm said he found the text entirely clear)
and got fron him imediately a practically complate approval.
Bruckner joined us a little later, and he followed Strohm's
lead. There were only two points of difference between us,
and neither of them Aid I re,ard as substantial. You will
see that on page 4 I asked for agreement that the German
Government would cooperate with us to the fullest possible
extent in respect of three items, only one of which, namely,
(e) was within the competency of the Foreign office. Strohm
and Pruckmer argued very logically that the Porcion Office
could not bind the Finance Ministry or any other Ministry of
the German Government and advised very earnestly against
seeking in advance to obtain the approval of the Finance
Ministry. I recognized the validity of both these points.
I incorporated items (a) and (b) in the paper because I did
not mow who would sign on the part of the Camion Government.
Had it be n Adenauer or, by his instructions, Hellstein, it
could be argued that their signatures did in affect bind the
entire Government. If, however, it is to be Strohm, as he
indicated it would be, then, obviously, he was
Wien, obviously, he was without pover
in the praises, It was agreed, therefore, that (a) and (b)
would be omitted, and that instead thereof Strohm would draft
a general clause binding the Forel n office to cooperate to
the fullest postille extent with NCPE in reaching satisfac-
tory solutions of any problems arising between HCFE and any

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_374.jpeg ---
14-00000
917
thexo
-
he could and that, meanwhile, he
to start preliminary discussions.
->
Bruckner - would be glad
Again, I placed somewhat sinister interpretation
on what appeared to be a chronic tendency on the part of the
Ger an officials authorized to negotiate with us to be absent
whenever we put in an appearance for the purpose of nerotia-
ting with them. My pessimism was increased by the very rigid
and uncooperative attitude of Bruckner, although I realized
that having no authority and proba ly having been insufficient-
ly briefed he was, naturally, keeping his neck well within
the protection of his collar. In any case, he brought up some
of the stickiest questions comm-eted with our operation,
talked of parliamentary interpeliations, of the responsibility
of the German authorities for anytring broadcast from German
soil, of the importance of German participation in determining
program content, of the dangers of arousing refugee antagonism,
and so on and so forth.
After an hour of this, I was ready to call it a day
and suggest that we come back when we could talk to Strohm
but, fortunately, at that moment Strohm came in and the entire
atmosphere changed. He apologized profusely - and »pparently
sincerely - for the delay, expresses himself anxious to co-
operate in every possible way to meet our requirements,
brushed aside some of the technicalities raised by Bruckner,
and got down to the essentials very rapidly. We went over
the ground we had previously gone over with Bruckner, we ex-
plained our purpose and kept our feet fairly firmly planted
on the principles which we regarded on basic, The result of
our long discussion was substantial agreegent on the two
things that mattered most;
a) license term of five years, and
b)
no unqualified cancellation right of the kind
first sugested by the Bundespost, and more
or less insisted upon by Bruckner.
The area of agreement was so froad that we suggested
an adjournment to per it us to put in writing the agresment
ve had reached, return with it to the Foreign Office, and
agree upon a final text.
Fritz was a little too optimistic rewarding the
task that lay befors us, and it was clear an hour or so
before the time fixed for our aft room apointment that we
would not be ready, so telephoned to Strohm and postponed
the appointment until the next day at noon. We worked all
afterno n at NICOG, and until after midnight in our Cologne
hotel. Wo had talked about an exchange of letters as the
vehicle for the a reement, but it became difficult to deter-
mine who was writing what to whom since the Germans could not
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_377.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 7
officially to address to NCFE immediately upon the coming
into effect of the contractual agreements, and which would
have attached to it a copy of the license which would be
granted by the Hundespost as of the date of the coming into
effect of the contractual aereements. This letter, when
acknowledged and accepted by NCFE, would constitute, with
the license, the agrement between the parties. Dr. Strohm
promised to have the draft in Faris by Wednesday or Thursday
of this week.
Fritz to in london this week in connection with
the Ger an ubts negotiations, but will return for the work
end at which time he and I will go over the draft together.
It se ms to both of us unlikely that we shall be able to accept
Dr. Strohmta draft without any change whatsoever, and it will;
therefore, probably be necessary for us to go back to Bonn
for one or perhaps two days to iron out any rossining diffi-
culties to acrec on final text and to laitial such text
with the Germans for the purpose of recording our agreement.
Both Fritz and I are astonished at the apparent
ease with which our negotiations progressed. We were able
to reach aglooment on the most important questions concerned,
but we are both cautious and we both realize that between
last Friday's agreement and next Thursday's draft letter
there may be sore vat divergencies, but certainly if the
spoken word can be relied upon, and if a friendly, cooperative
and even generous attitude on the part of the principal German
officials of the Bundespost and Foreign office to whom we
spoke is significant, the German authorities are genuinely
anxious to make it possible for RFE to continue to operate
effectively, I think that we are all justified in feeling
very much encouraged by what it has been possible to accom-
plish in the past two weeks.
If the above time schedule can be observed, and if
not later than Tuesday of next week we can have the documents
in final shape and duly initialed, I plan to leave Paris for
Lisbon, via Panair do crasil, on Thursday, the 13th, stay in
Lisbon not more than one week, and be lack in New York
around the 21st.
I ancione a copy of the English translation of the
proposed Bundespost license arend upon on February 19th,
with the na Article III referred to asove, and a copy of the
craft Memorandum of Understanding dated February 29, 1952, so
that you say have before you all the rol vant papers.
Mr. Robert E. Lang,
Sincerely yours,
Director, RFE,
110 West 57th Street,
New York 19, N.Y. - U.N.A.
Miller ✓
CC Mr. C.D. Jackson, Admiral Miller, Mr. J.C. Hughes,
Mr. F.C. Kempner

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_379.jpeg ---
14-00000
2.
1
4. The radio installations will be operated in accordance with
the provisions of the International Telecommunications
Convention presently in force (Atlantic City 1947) and the
Radio Regulations annexed to said convention and any conventions
or Regulations, to which the Federal Republic is a party
which may take their place,
5. In the event of inte:ference by NCFE radio installations with
German radio services NCFE in consultation with the DBP will tak
necessary measures to eliminate the interference as rapidly
as possible.
6. Duly accredited representatives of DBP shall be accorded free
access to all technical installations of NCFE's radio
stations in Germany during office hours as well as outsido
office hours, the latter only upod prior notification.
7. NCFE shall reimburse DEP for all cums which DBP is obliged
to expend as a result of accidents suffered by any of its
employees in the performance of their duties on the premises of
NCFE.
8. The license fee for the above-mentioned radio installations
is fixed at $ 10,000.- per year, payable in advance in
quarterly instalments on the first of each quarter by re-
mittance to Bank Deutscher Laender in favor of the Generalpost-
kasse of DBB, except that as first installment there shall be
paid an amount computed pro rata temporis from the date
of the license to the first of the next following quarter.
II. This license is not transferable. It can be revoked at any time
without notice if
:
1
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_378.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
I.
The Bundesminister fuer das Post- und Frnmeldewesen hereby
grants to the HCFB, a membership corporation organized
under the laws of the State of New York (USA) recognized
in the Federal Republic as a foreign "Verein", a licence
to operate the radio installations listed and specified in
the Annex as foreign radio station on German territory on
the following conditions.
1. In operating the radio installations the NCFE will use only
the frequencies and call signs al ocated to it from time to
time by the competent authorities of the USA, and duly
notified by said authorities to the competent organs of
the International Telecommunications Union.
2. The radio installations may be only operated for broadcasting
purposes (Radio Regulations Chapter I Article I Section II
n. 21 and 22) of the NCFE; international point to point
connections for broadcasting purposes are also permitted
subject to the consent of interested foreign administrations;
for purposes of third puties the radio installations may
not be used without prior written consent of the BPMin.
3. Without prior written consent of the BPMin NCFE is not per-
mitted to change the technical specifications of the above
mentioned rasio transmitting installations or to put additional
radio transmitting installations into operation; changes in
frequencies and cell signs/must be notified to the BPMin
used
in advance.
Broadcasting Services
21 a) A radioco.munication service of transmissions to be
received directly by the general public.
22 b) This service may include transmissions of sounds or trans-
missions by television, facsimile or other means.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_380.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
->
○ 1) one of the conditions of the license (I) should be
violated and such violation should continue despite request
to desist;
III) This license shall be valid for a period of five years
commencing with the date of its issuance and will be authmaticall
extended thereafter from year to year wiless written notice of
termination is given by one party to the other not less than
90 days prior to the next expiration date.
IV) In the event of revocation (II) or of expiration (III) of the
license the operation of the radio installations shall be
discontinued at once.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_381.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
Draft
29 Feb 1952
Nemorandum of underetanding between Kr. Phenix, representing
the NCFE sha Dr.
representing the Federal
German Republio
Mr. Phonix stated that the NCFE had been founded in
1049 by a group of private American citizens animated by
the desire to encourage by positive measures the eventual
liberation from the communist yoke of the peoples of the
onelaved countries. of Central and Eastern Europe. He
explained that with the help of endowments and publis
contributions to the Crusade for Freedom, the Committee had
undertaken, among its other activities, the operation through
Radio Free Europe of radio broadcasting installations through
which 18 disseminated to listeners in the Iron Curtain
countries programs especially prepared by the Committee for
the furtherance of its objectives. He pointed out that
Radio Free Europe had constructed and was presently op-
erating transmitter stations at Holskirchen and Biblis, had
erected a large studio and office building in Munich and main-
tained a large monitoring establishment at Schleissheim and
that its programs were prepared with the help of leading
scholars, journalists, administrators and economie experts,
and men of letters who have escaped from the communist
control of their native land,
I
1
Mr. Phenix explained that the installation of RFE
facilities in the United States Zone of Germany had been
during
effected by the NCFE the occupation of that Zone
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_382.jpeg ---
14-00000
2.
by the U.S. Army and that the operations of RPE had been, and
we're being facilitated by the U.S. Army authorities because of
FFE's status as an accredited American information
agency. He observed that the NCFE was concerned lest the
termination of the Occupation Status would, in the absence
of specific agreement with the Federal German Republic, re-
sult in hampering the work of RFE and impairing its effect-
iveness, and that, with the approval of the Department of
State, negotiations had been carried on with the BFKin which
had resulted in agreement as to the terms of a license which
would be granted by the BPMin to NCFE immediately upon the
termination of the Occupation Statute. A copy of that license
is appended hereto.
Mr. Phenix called attention to the fact that this license
dealt with the technical aspects of RFE's radio broadcast
operations and that there were several non-technical matters
wich required clarification before the NCFE would feel
Justified in undertaking the long runge program it has under
consideration.
Dr. _
stated that the objectives and purposes
of NCFE, in the realization of which RFE was engaged, vere
objectives and purposes to which the Federal Government itself
was unalterably committed. The negotiations for a BPMin
license had been conducted with his full knowledge and approval.
He was well aware that by licensing RPT's operation in Germany,
fully cognisant of the objectives and purposes of that operation,
the Federal Government was on the one hand encouraging the
expenditure by NCFE for that operation of large sums of money
contributed by the American public and on the other

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_38.jpeg ---
14-00000
NAG
AMOUNT
FREICH TRÄNGS
4040001
10 000
Planosik
Orunes
10.000
Shunrarian FOND
40.000
40,000
Ribar Bosco
30=000
407000
30-000
50.000%
ro
96-181
NATURA OF
">
:
5

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
STANDARD FORM
Office Memorandum
TO ,S/P - Mr. Joyce
RITY INFORMATION
C-22
• UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
DATE: February 19, 1952
FROM 5
->
Mr. barbour
»
SUBJECT:Fund Memorandum No. 62 of Docember 21, 1951 attaching conica of
documenti reparding the activities of the Central and "astern
European Conference (Slavik-Major Group)
1
T
Your attention is invited to subject menorsadun which mates 2
speech by Jerzy Lerski, Vice Chairman of the Polish Political Council's
Working Committee in the United States, proposing the formation of a
domestic political pressure group of American residents of Has ern
European stock. In the course of his speech, 12. Lerski repeats and
endorses the official statement of Aims and Principles of ederation
of Americans of Central and East European Descent. This statement,
particularly in its paragrapi. o. 3, proposes that their objectives
should be obtained through "unified political action."
The Department is obviously in complete support of their basic
objective, namely, the overthrow of Communism. novever, we do perceive
real harm in the utilization of CC funds to procote donmentic political
pressure groups; esuncially, when such groups will self-avondly engage in
political and election contests in the United States in order to further
their objectives abroad.
Accordingly, we would supprest that stens be taken to ensure t.t
groups which are sponsored by or supported through affiliation with
C be restrained from participating in or assisting such usmestic
political pressure groups as is proposed in subject Fund
_ uc groups should be cautioned, in any event, to avoid any public
declarations of intent to intervene in domestic rican polities.
3
WAR
:
2/17/52
Pell:le
1952
I
T

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_384.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
4.
(a) that property of NCFE brought into Germany prior
to the termination of the Occupation Statute be recognised as
logally within Germany and subject to the free disposition of
NCFE.
(b) that NCFE be recognized as a non-profit organization
of publio interest and that in respect of its operatione in
Germany it and its employees are entitled to no less favorable
treatment than any comparable German non-profit corporation or
entity.
(c) that the non-German personnel now employed by NCFE
in Germany be permitted to remain in Germany while so employed:
and that additional non-derman employses be permitted to enter
Germany for such employment subject only to the right of the
competent Germany authorities to deny entry to any indivi ual
whoas presence in Germany would in their opinion prejudice
German internal security.
Dr. _
stated that he recognised the importance of
these elements in the operation of FFE in Germany and that the
Federal German Republie would cooperate with NCFE to the
:
fullest possible extent in meeting its requirements
respect thereto.
O3VI3O
ONI 349 350 ROT SATIO
RIOITAN
with
i
:
1
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_383.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
!
;
:
M
was giving NCFE an assurance that RFE's operation in Germany
would not be interfered with, but on the contrary would be
facilitated and helped by the Federal Goverment.
From his viewpoint there was only one reservation he had
to make: RFE would be expected to refrain from using its broad-
cast facilities on German soll for the purpose of advocating
and promoting political ends which the Federal Government con-
sidered in conflict with its own basic policies. Hence, the
Federal Government would have the right, officially to notify
NCFE through the Foreign Office of any such conflict. Should the
German stations of KFE thereupon not refrain from advocating
and promoting the policies to which the Federal Government had
objected, the Federal Government would have no choice but to
require the surrender by NCFE of its license and the discontinuance
of its broadcast operations from German territory.
Nr. Phenix stated that he understood the reasons for
the views expressed by Dr.
, accepted his reservation,
and agreed to the procedure outlined, and that to provide a
factual basis for the consideration of any question which might
arise in respect of RFE broadcasts the latter would keep on
file for a period of 30 days from the date of use all tapes
recording programs broadcast from RPE transmitters in Germany
so that any questioned program would be available to the appro-
priate German authorities when requested by them. Mr. Phenix
then emphasized the importance attached by NCFE to certain other
aspects of the operating problems of FFE, for example:
*
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECTET
SECURITY INFORMATION
21 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
Committee for Russian Liberation
Execute Reg.
7274
☑
Nated by 9/QCI
1. I called Bob Joyce in the State Department yesterday
and asked him whether in his view the State Department would
object to placing the new Committee for Russian Liberation under
the Crusade for Freedom. I mentioned particularly a possible
caveat of the State Department that wo might be expanding the
Crusade at the very time we had agreed at a series of meetings
held recently that we would cut down its activities.
'
-->
2. Joyce said that the agreement with State was as to
method and scope of Crusade publicity and activity and that the
addition of the new Committee under Crusade cover would not by
any means abrogate this agreement. He said that we could go
ahead and count upon the State Department's approval. I asked'
him whether he would like a memorandum to this effect or whether
he would like to consult others in the State Department and he
caid no, that this was unnecessary, that we should go ahead.
Jam Bunden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Orig:
DD/P (thru ADPC)
1 cc: EE (Mr. Poor)
1 cc:
2 CC:
C/IO
RI
ģ
3

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_42.jpeg ---
1
14-00000
1
1
* Rasa In
20 Mard: 52
Mr. Braden
Kiss Stern today
asked Mr. Leich
to send a copy of
to her
the
reply
and also to give.
fer
fu.
a
. This he can
obtain
Mr. Broders:
NEV
B
Jolu said he had an explanation
of this letter which he will mail todas.
Also will report after he has hard driver

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_40.jpeg ---
14-00000
RMATION
21 Earm 1752
MINORAYDIROND
UNJ (7: Telephone Conversation with miral H. F. killer on 21 Marcu.
1
Adiral Miller called me today and naked no to pass along tum
warningbi
"X/frWal”
2. He objects to what is as man is to "proval" of CIA
officials of the plan to put Amiral Kirk's Comittas under the
Crusade for Freeda... lie said he bought the ower of the Crusade was
by now almost non-existent and cited a recent costing of an advertis
Ing groun of which is a member were, he said, various se:bers
turned to him and ackord him to quit kidding. I sold to Adairal millor
that I thought that the "val" to which no referred was a matier
of policy as between the State Dimartsent and OA and that I Usought
it probable that if there had been arg even aproval the CA officials
who pave it and in mind the necessity of socuring his views teioro
putting the plan int effect. He replied that to wanted to be as
helpful as possible and that if all Mairal kirk had to fall back on
was the Crusade for Free in maps no would have to yield, but
he said that in any event if Miral Kirk's Committee were to be added
to the Crusado, tio Crusade would have to be expanded. He could not
possibly attempt to furnish esver under the recent acrequent with the
State Department to cut down the activity of the Crusade.
2. He said that he wanted to issue a warning to all nem at
heads would mortly roll & Min Ho
sald that he had recently
hart a talk with Fred Dollars and come over bitearatearization
and that as a result of this talk illorevious conviction as to the
necessity for reorgani was emphasised tenfold. He said we thought
there were too many job meid by people whose qualifications were Lihat
they worm the old school the or that they had relatives who already
held jobs, and ne sallivende to clean use to such a degree that
he might soon be able to rent a floor in the New York bullain.
that there may be some restinations as a resuit mal that i should be
proared for tiem, but no tato unt ne astuned we wanted aim to conduct
efficient operations and refer to had a green light to do so until
we called him off. I assured him that this was a fact.
10 cald
Coith Bieh
Orig APC--DD/Y--Dra
1 cc - I
2 cc - FI
A. MAS
Cilof
International rizations Division
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_43.jpeg ---
14-00000
E
UNCL
UNCLASSIFIED
.ESTRICTED
CONFIDENTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
SLIP
10.
-
2
3
"
5
FROM
-
2
3
SECRET
INITIALS DATE
☐ APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
REMARKS:
!
}
DATE
ķ
SIGNATURE
RETURN
.DISPATCH
FILE
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
30-4
mp3 gytinez
pytime book apm
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
UNCLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_44.jpeg ---
+
14-00000
:
10/52
Mr. Wimer --
an information copy of letter sent
by Mr. Jackson today. Mr. Damewood
is receiving a copy via regular channels.
M.McCrum
Yarch 10, 1958
Dear Fansignor Vargas-
As I wind up my year with the Entional Committes for
a Free Europe, I thought it appropriate to send you a letter
not a letter of farewell, but rather some thoughts on the
Hungarian National Counsail as I have oloerved it during the year.
In the first place, I would like to congratulate you
and your associates on having done an extraordinary job of
holding a very volatile situation together. In fact, it was
a unique job, and one whose value we may never fully appreciate
because so many of the benefits are intangible.
I hope, therefore, that you will eantime to work with
undiminished will to hold the Council together, as it would
present a very serious problem to admiral Miller if the
Hungarim group were to fall apart.
vare
I would also like to congratulate you on the effective
work the representatives of the hungarian lational Council
have done abroad, particularly in France and Germany. You
know how important i consider this worZ, It seems to no that
the real task and duty of a national Council is to help the
exiles, and the front lince of this work are in Europe.
Aside from the obvious necessities of food, clothing,
shelter, the most important aspect of the work is what I would
call a "consular” service, as these poer people do not knos
shere ar how to turn. In this concular-type work, I think that
General Hennyey and Mr. Auer have been doing an excellent job,
and my personal feelings in this matter are com·letely con-
firmed by reactions I have received from the international
Refuges Cryanisation and the official foreign and Arsarioan
administrations in these countries.
To my way of thinking, exile political matters in New
York and Lachin ton should take a definitely second place to
helping human beings in distress, and although there are some
who do not agree with this order of priority, I am caliſited
and grateful that the work of the Hungarian National Council
indicates that you share these ideas.
12-68112
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_39.jpeg ---
14-00000
*:
4
*
11sh corop
1 * *
MOUNT
RANC
20.000
mzeeresp
30.000
108000
40.000
30=000%
10.000
30-000
10:0
10:000
33.000
$307000
TAL

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_45.jpeg ---
14-00000
W
Since this is an honest letter, and not just pro-forma
appreciation by a retiring iresident, I mmst also, unfortunately,
include some observations that are not so pleasant.
I remember very early in my work id th NOFF, that you
taught me the political meaning of the word "polarisation",
and since then I have hed ample opportunity in the Hungarian
National Council to see polarization at work,
HCFB has grown in the past year into a large organisation
engaged in berious work, and frequently proving its effective-
neus behind the Iron Curtain. To put it mother way, during
the past year NUFF, has evolved from just a hope into a professional
weapon in the var against the eney. Therefore, activities
which a year are wore deplorable but pardonsals, are today.
ago
inexcusablɔ and intolercule.
Admiral fillor agrees with me completely on this point,
and intends to take such action from time to time as may be
necessary to softbar such activities when they occur.
However, I recognise that it is not enough for NCFS
to take unilateral action. ke must be assisted by you and
these of your associates uno understand who the real onery is,
and are willing to subordinate fratricidal strife, polarising
attempts, and disloyal activities.
I fully realise that these are nothing bat big words
unless I can illustrate them more specifically.
I have in my possession enough illustrations to fill a
volum, but I would like to select three in particular to
mention in this letter, not because i have any particular
desire to single out the individuals concerned for omsure,
but rather because what they have done not mily illustrates
the point I an trying to make, but also reveals an attitude
of mind which is practically incoqurchensible to an Anoticas
working for a great cause.
The first case that I have in mind is that of r.
Puremo Mary.
Last February, ir. hagy wrote a letter to Kr. Frank 5.
Land of Kansas City, Missouri, complaining bitterly about the
National Coudttes for a Free Kurope, accusing it of "supporting :

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
contributed more to "intre-mittee controversies" than Fr.
Nagy himself. Furthermore, an analysis of Fr. Macy's definition
of "Tanocrats and reactionaries would be extremely interesting. -
It might have been more soarte had he said "people who
supported my Covermant in i? and everybody else",
e
As to the matter af my exile casdties, whether the
Hungarian National Council or Fr. Easy's Central Eastern
European Cordttes; Deing able to “guarantee" to the people
behind the iron Curtain that predse would be carried out,
Kr. Nagy's statement is either drivolous or prepostervIS,
Pr. Bary winds up with a request that the President
give his blessing to ir. Hagy's proposed super-amadites --
the Central astern Europeas farditee
i
Cardttee – thich represents
"a total majority of 70 tɔ ôề cử the entire population of
Central Eastern Europe."
I an frankly fascinated by the proosness of Mr. Hagy's
mind. I cannot believe that all he thinks about is the promotion
of Leftish Hungarian politicians in exile. I cumot talisve
that as a human being he dès art feel sanc samme of responsi
bility toward Hort and the Dungarian National Council,
have montal after month helped him. I do not vim to sound
dramatic, I do not ask for taunits, and I am not suggesting ·
that in return for our halp us impose an obligation of a quid
pro quo. but I do say that the question of loyalty does
arise, and the meation of responsibility is very real.
Furthermore, Ir. Ay be been in this country long
mough no to understand that this kind of intriguing is a
distressing irritation to everyone, including the white House.
Maş
My second illustration aime concerns Pr. Hagy. Mr. Kagy
recently saut a telegram to bessewffy, of which the follow-
ing is a translation. I have the wiginal Bungarian if you
care to see its
#YNG HAVE SUBMITTED SOME OF THE NEW YORK
RADIO PRET MAGNARS FEW STAFE ELLERS:
BEAD: ARDEN Golár, SUTI KAKHI NHUS, LAJOS
MAIASE, IKISO SAIN, 19713 MNTHICS, HS L'VARNA
STOP COMIAT : NI THAT IHL RADIO STATION
LROADCASTS IS THE ME (15) IRJELAATIC MUTARIAN
XS, I AS THE POT OFTEN HASART FI. FRATION
CALL THE MLG & HESLITICAL CONRISTIE TO
INFIDIATLAY FUTE MADE PAIS SULATION IS ACC¨YTABLE
TO DSP

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
.5.
Agnin I would like to know what is going through Fr.
Nagy's mind.
BCFZ, an inerican organisation, hired Fr. Deseenify
to to the responsible head of its Hungarian Desk in mich.
“ir. Lessenffy tas a very careful choice after weeks of consul-
tation on both sides of the Atlantic. His specific instructions
wore that the Munich est should be staffed by people
selected for fixational cqmctance, excluding, of course,
Communists and fascisto.
for
At the same time, it was felt that the BCYE had permitted
political affiliation to overshadow functional competence ia
la
the New York Hungarian cok, and the New York Desk simply
sman't any good. Therefore, the New York Boak and the unich
Desit had to be brought into aligument. So 15. Lessently was
sent to America ani uns iven the responsibility of hiring the
necessary personal – und in New York was instrusted to apply
the same yardstick that he applied in thmich.
whan Mr. Dessewffy had fulfilled his New York task,
again after the most serious consideration of all the angles
involved in each one of his choices, Fr. Nagy sent him the
telegras quoted above as though lir. Macy ere in the position
to control, or at least to veto, the membership of the Leske
Does Mr. Hagy really believe that he is in that
position? Or is tds pure polarisation. is we all know, this
is a move directed against Fr. Colleat, she does not heryen
to have the sune political coloration as . Mary. In a
recent conversation súla Fr. Magy, I asked him if the tele[7@a
would have been scat if ir. Gellert had not been selected, and
he admitted that it would not have been sent.
There is an additional interesting alonment in this,
in that ir. Mary calls for a vote as the resident of the
Hungarian teasunt union. Doesn't fir. lingy know that
Hungarian leasant uma does not exist as a viablo political
party; it only exists in the individual persons in exile sho
happen formerly to have been numbers of the hungarian: reagant
Union. Hr. Hagy is not a member of a government-in-exile, er
even of a parliament-in-exile, so that this action of his is
totally unreal, indicating undllingness to recognise the
world as it exists.
!
Doesn't Mr. Hagy realize that the only way that exile
politicians can achieve political reality is through national
and international unity in order to bring about the liberation
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
-30
outmoded and old-fashioned reactionary political ideologies”,
and asking Hr. Land to advise hin as to how this situation could
be brought to the attention of President Trum in order to
have him do something about it. As a result of that letter,
Fir. Land wrote to the white lionse, and in the normal course
tida full correspondence came to me.
I naked ir. Hagy to simms to the office, and tried to
explain to his that what he had done was not only a lad, but
a very silly thing. It was bed in the sense that he had
violated eur homitality by secretly attempting to conspire
against the organization vidich vas supporting him. It was
silly in assuring that he could carry on this kind of intriços
without my knowing about it – in fact, without having the
shite House check with M13, an American organisation, us to
shat action should be taken.
Mr. Kagy neemed to unsieretand what I tried to explain
to him, and with what I consizered complete homesty and sinearity,
expressed his regrets and said to t it would not happen again.
In return for this frank understanding on his part, wo shock
hands, and i promised that the correspondence would be put
away in our files and never referred in again, and as you know,
I have never even mentioned it to you.
Mr. Hagy has once agrán written to ìresident Truman
this time directly. And once again the White House has cent
no the marantus.
I consider that ir. Kagy has troken his pledge, and
therefore I am free to tell you about the incident.
This time, although the words of Mr. Nacy are more
texperate, the mlody is the arm - dissatisfaction with what
HCYE has done; dissatisfaction sith the Hungarian National
Council. Lot mo quote a paszaçes "The existing Eational
Cospritters are not in themselves suitable for this task, partly
because of the general intra-Conditten contreveralos vetvoen
Democrate and reactionaries, and partly because these Comittoss
are not considered by the peoples behind the Iran Curtain
international guarantee that prodings would be carried out,”
I cannot help comunting at this point that in the
Hungarian National Council toure is probably no one who has

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_49.jpeg ---
14-00000
.6.
of their countries, and therefore the day when they can qnos
again start legitimate and real party rivalry to appeal to
a free electorate?
#
The third cass I would like to muntion concurna Mr.
Zoltan Pfeiffer.
After Mr. Lessenffy mdo his selections for the New
York Denk, Ir. Pfeiffer got in touch with him to protest against
the fact that in selecting Fr. Gellert, IT. Desseuffy had been
unfaithful to the allholers Party, ich because !T.
Comacuffy had formerly bean a mumber of that party, expected a
clean sweep of the Hea York Deak, irrespective of functional
competence. Mr. Fieffer further stated and this is the really
important point - that because of the appointment of 12.
Cellart, fr. Ffeiffer would have to "atta.k" Pr. Dessewffy from
now on, wherever and whenever possible; in short, a declaration
–
Again, I would like to understand fr. Pfeiffer'
mental processes. Who does he think he is? Where does he think
he is? This is a very serious world, and not a itufolf trial
operetta. Hr. Ffeiffer is not in luxiapost conducting a political
campaign against a warward mrber of a left-wing party. Ir.
Hfeiffer in in Bew Zork, an associate of NCF, with every
opportunity to have his opinion heard and his influence felt.
But after a decisim has been rada, in good faith and after
long consideration, to exploy a man because of his ompetenos
to do a job, it is r. ffeiffer's responsibility as on associate
of the sume organisation to help that man do his work, and
not to indulge in declarations of war in order to disrupt the
operation.
I am sorry to have had to go into this unpleasant detail,
but after a year of patiently observin; and listening, I feal
that I have earned the right to speak plainly.
I hope that somehow or other, it will te possible for
you to explain to your membership that this does not intend
to be hampered or sabotaged by exile political mnewwing.
I also hope that you will be able to persuado your
compatriots that insofar as Bust can interpret 4.3. paliay,

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_5.jpeg ---
úter
=
1.
14-00000
FUND 1
322
SECRET
C-22
TRIVATE
Due mber 31, 1951
Attached to this memorandus are copies of documents
regarding the activities of the contral and Eastern
European Cenforence (Slavik-Hajer Grosp).
(Seraki)
JAN 5 1952
SECRET
4144
ML-16

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_50.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
3-
it believes that the Coverment of the United States,
loolding forward to the eventual liberation of Hungary,
will not permit any political group or individual in
cils, to set up a monopoly for howell, his grow, or
with reneved this for you highly successful work
in the past, and the furvent nope that you will be equally
successful in the future, i an
Fansigner Bela Varga
227 Kast 72nd Street
New York, N. Y.
kancerely yours,
C. D. Jaakeas
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_54.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
•Office of
I. ^.. should be be informed
all transactions undertaken betw if the
line divisions & NC76
W/Dept. of State
a.
close contacts w/ area deaks of dept of
state
b. meet jointly w/members of Dept. in a
CIA- State Coord. Com. of formalite
policy
w/NCTE
on
engre tatters
I
Close supervcs + control over meze
in 1.4.8
Paris.
Integrate in NOTE's office
one
or several high level individuais whing
directly for CIA.
Purpose
Travison on
Orig. Riches
Etates
ures
Como
Reasons for failure
Possible Purses of action
Rec

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_53.jpeg ---
+
fem
14-00000
:
1. Intricacies of
Balkan politics
2.CIA's failure to provide continuing
policy guidance to the Exce. Com. in N.Y.
3. No final focus of responsibility for
national council policy in Work.
4. Anice in d.. which is poorly
staffed has made toelf virtually
independent of
CIA guidance.
2
mature
savoir-faires
broad background in Balkan politics
Price Reco.
!
a. Maintenance
b. Expansion of
National Councils
NOTE activis in Pares
* C. Support of Harizontal Groups.
IPU
CJU
Slavik - Mayer / Nagy Groups sto
Emigre Affaits
Admin. Rec. :
formulate policy
a.
W/ views
%
M
emigre matters
CIA live divisions
Dept of
state
other us bout
P.) provide direct polien guidance
control
over NC7E
Rel. w/ ather C.KA offices
offices.
I
adviser. And.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_52.jpeg ---
14-00000
->> . 2
-
exus
40 As the first and principal step toward this arrangement, it is
recommended that
an experienced, knowledgeable, high-level CIA officer
responsible ADPC be stationed in the NCFE organization to work
directly with Admiral Miller. for cover purposes he would carry the
title of Deputy to the President, but there should be no doubt in the
minda of the NOWE top echelon as to his complete identity with CIA.
Because his sole task would be to represent AP's interests, he should
mot normally be in the NCFS chain of command, should not be paid by that
organization, and should not be made responsible for any given NC: £
function or activity. se visualize his function a that of a representa-
tive charged with explaining and representing CIA's interests, functioning
as a channel of information about the organization to which he is
accredited, and controlling all liaison between the two. In our opinion,
the establishment of this post, with a suitable individual assigned to the
✓ job, would immediately correct most of the present difficulties, and would
provide the necessary machinery within which a fully satisfactory relation-
ship between CPC and NCFE could develop.
SB/PC/DS+18]
GRATIAN M. YATLEVITCH
Deputy for Polloy Coordination, SE
Distributions
Addressee - Orig. 41
SD/RB
SZ/PC
✓ 84
-> 2
-
2
-1 (mm Beadow)
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_56.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECURITY unitja
SECRET
STUDY AND MCUCLIDATIO'S RAMONG RELATIONS
17TH NATIONAL COUNCILS
U
t
HULROSE
The purpose of this paper is to 1) review briefly the accomplish-
ments of the National Councils Division of NUL, 2) attempt to point
out the reasons why the National Councils have not accomplished what
they set out to do and 3) make certain recommendations with respect
to policy and administration to remedy the present unsatisfactory and
unworkable situation. This last assumes that CIA must continue to
sponsor the National Council complex. However, it car do so only if
certain basic changes are made and if it is recognized that it is
incumbent on CIA to regain control of the important personalities of
the Eastern European enigration.
DISCUSSION
I Original Obiectives of National Councils Division
The National Councils Division of the National Committee for a
Free Europe was created on 3 April 1950 by resolution of the board of
Directors. The underlying principle, as stated in the Declaration of
Policy in June 1950, was to aid the "non-Fascist and non-Communist
leaders in their peaceful efforts to prepare the way toward the
restoration in Eastern Europe of the social, political and religious
libertios in which they and we believe." The councils were to function
as "representative, harmonious and effective groups" and, as such, to
play a part in the struggle against Communism in Eastern Europe. They
were not to be considered as governments in exile nor as ends in them-
selves.
National Committees and Panels,* as supported by HOPE, were to
fulfill a two-fold functions as 1) overt instruments, they were to
a) serve as a symbol of unity both in this country and abroad, b) provide
a reservoir of "name" manpower for profecranda use, c) supply general
propaganda policy advice, and d) supply ONE with both general and
specific intelligence with respect to hɔzeland activities and personal-
ities. As 2) covert instruments, they were to serve as a cover for
operations undertaken by CIA aimed at combatting Soviet oppression in
the satelite states.
*These ares
the Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian Panels, which were set
up with the help of CFE and which function well.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_51.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
SEGRET
7 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR:
-SUBJECT:
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY COORDINATION
NCFE
1. For quite some time the staff officers of this division concerned
with utilising the facilities of the NCE and with exploiting the
Albanian, Bulgarian, and Rumanian emigrations have been aware of a lack
of adequate coordination between our own activities and those of the
NCFE staff. in conjunction with those I Division officers responsible
for handling our relations with that organisation, we have attempted
to explore the problem in order to find a solution which could be
considered realistic and practical.
2. The difficulty lies not only in the communication system between
OPC and NCFE, which does not always transmit, at exactly the right time,
the right ideas from one organisation to the proper individuals at the
right level in the other. Although we have maintained very close contact
both informally and through formal channels, only too often we have not
been in a position to learn why NCFE staff officers have made a given decis-
ion in regard to some emigre organization in which we had an interest; and
on the other hand, our desires and needs have not always been fully under-
stood or accepted in New York. Again, it has happened that we were
ignorant of developments that closely affected our operations until it
was too late for us to make our influence felt, and, correspondingly,
. it must be admitted that we have ourselves pushed ahead with courses of
action without adequately briefing the NCFE. The most extreme case in
point known to us concerns the Rumanian emigration, where we and NCFE
are now pursuing conflicting policies. The upshot of this has been the
gradual development of a situation wherein OPC is supporting an organise-
tion, the NC, which is not fully responsive to it.
3. This situation is not regarded by us as reflecting any fundamental
inadequacy in NCFE, or as presenting any insoluable difficulty. There
exists a problem in staff interrelationship which can and should be
resolved by a reform in our organizational approach. The goal toward which
we believe we should work is one where OPC communication with NCIE would
be channelled directly along a single high-level line which would firmly
tie in ADPC's office with that of the head of the other organisation.
Ideas, suggestions, information, etc. would flow, in the regular channels,
up from the OPC working level to APPC's office for review and transmission
to the top office of NCWE, and flow down from there through NFS's usual
channels to the proper individuals in its operational machinery. Personal
contacts between individuals at a lower level in the two organisations
would frequently occur to supplement this usual crannal, when security
permitted, but should be in the hands of responsible personnel who
understand the OPC policies involved.
1
L.
As the first
!

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
Saves lif
SECRET
PEN
7 Karch 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Kr. Thomas W. Braden
SUFJ.CT:
Relations with National Councils
1. Attached hereto is a study concerning the National
Councils, with certain conclusions and recommendations.
2. I have deliberately delayed submitting this study because
I wanted to be cure of the validity of my criticism and recommendations.
To this end, I discussed this paper at several stages of its develop-
mont with various officers in the line divisione concerned and also
with individuals who have been in close touch with the Eational
Councils Division of NCFE. As a result, I feel that what is submitted
in the attached study reflects not only my own views, kut also those
of the responsible area experts.
3. I feel you will agree that, under visting conditions, it is
impossible to carry out effectively any of the functions related to
national council matters with which wo are charged. The recent "Nagy
Affair" and the resultant embarrassment curves us a good illustration.
4. In view of the interest that has been demonstrated in this
paper by SE and E-2, it is suggested that copies of the study be sent
to them.
5. This whole matter, I believe, is of such importance as to
warrant further discussion, and I should appreciate having the
opportunity of talking to you.
Attachment
As stated above
DCFY
SECRET
Eller Steri
ÄLLEN STERI

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_57.jpeg ---
14-00000
::
:
-
· 2 -
☐
SECRE!
i
II Status of Coittees
"
During the course of the past year, it has become increasingly
apparent that national committees have failed to operate as
"representative, effective and harmonious groups.” Out of the cix groups
of emigros supported financially by LCFL," only three have any sort of
a working; council (the Albanian, Bulgarian and hungarian) and only
one--the hungarian-operates with airy degree of harmony. The Czech rund
Rumanian Councils have split into two opposing factiune. The Czucha
have recently affected a reconciliation which, to date, is merely a
puper "agreement" and is still awaiting implementation. No attempts
at bringing together the kumanian Association and the humanian
Committoo have succeeded. The Eulgarian Committee, while mot split,
has teen handicapped by the dictatorial methods of its Chairman,
Dr. G. M. Dimitrov, and has therefore been of little value as an
organization. Attempts to offset this situation by an enlargement of
the Committes are now under way. An enlargement of the Albanian
Committee is also considered to be necessary, but here disagreement
with the British is a complicating factor. The Poles, after long
years of dissension, finally seem to have agreed on the formation of a
Council of National Unity. Additional information regraing sach-of-
these committees is appended hereto...
III Reasons for the Failure
The reason for the failure of the national councils to fulfill
the stated objectives has often been attributed to intrique, rivalry
and jealousy among emigre politicians. while this is certainly a
contributing factor, it is one which should be expected in any dealings
with leaders reared in the intricacies of Balkan politics. A more
important and far more basic cause for the present exortcomings of the
national councils has been CIA's failure to provide continuing policy
guidance to, and appropriate control over, the Executive Committee of
ECFE in New York. This failure has in large part resulted from the
lack of a clearly defined mechanism within CIA through which to perform
these functions.
~'
At present a situation exists in which there is:
1) No final focus of responsibility for national cruzeil policy
in Washinų ton. Various individuals throughout CIA and the Department
of State are mediling in national council and related enige matters
owing to the vacuum which CIA has permitted to develop and because no
one is charged with final responsibility. Furthermore, members of the
*The six groups are: the Albanian, Dulgarian, Czech, Hungarian, Folish
and Rumanian.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
STIAL
Sir,
On behalf of Mr. A. retaionu, 'hairman of the last
conference, and ir. Monstantine otitch, Jairman of the
Serbian Hot mal committee, Chair an of the next meeting
of the Central and astorn uropean enfarance, I an in-
viting you and your political friends to a meeting of the
ich will be held on Tuesday, December 10, 1951 at
the hotel illard, Executive loom, Pennsylvania Ave. and
14th St., Hashington, N.., at precisely 3 P.M.
The Agonda of the meeting will bes
2.
3.
heport of the ocrotary Teneral on the meetings of the
Conoral Committee on the action of the CASC on deporta-
tions, in ashington, New York, Faris, about the press
conference in Castington, etc.
Report of Fr. Jorey Loraki (Vice Chairman of the
• Polish Political Council, orking Cousittee in the U.S.)
on collaboration with Americans of Central and Cast
uropean Joscent.
Report of Mr. V. Stanka on orld University.
The report of br. Larski is attached to this invitation.
Very sincerely yours,
(signed) br. Juraj lavik
Secretary
(cu
KOUN
eneral
INTIAL
(On Amaricans of Central and sast -uropean Descant)
From Jargy Lorski, fice hairman of the 'olish
Political Council's orkin; Committes in the
2.3., 618 A treet,
Apt. 15, shington 3,
The last three decades of the past century and the first two of
the present one, wark the period in which millions of the innoverished
peasants of entral and astern surope case to the happy shores of froo
Aserica. There are om at least twelve million U.i. citizens of
Central and ast
ast ropean descent. This is, of course, a test careful
estimate. Congressman Kenneth . leating of Notrester, 4. Y., in hip
4.
..

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_59.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
SECRET
NATION
at various meetings in this country and at
gatherings, ruch as the European Movement,
abroad.
b. Psycholomical Warfare
To engage in all sorts of activities which will
encourage the spirit of resistance of the peoples
of Eastern Europe and keep the story of Eastern
Europe's struggle for liberation before the
people of the West by appropriate publicity.
c. Kesearch, Analysis and Planning
To organize and carry on long-range research analysis
and planning projects which will utilize the talents
of the Lastern European refucces. This area includes
the Library of Congress and other research projects and
the activities of the horizontal international
organizations, such as the Slavik-Mayer/Nagy Groups.
3) liational Councils will Not Control WWL. Nothwithstanding the
State Department's views, it is wise at present to maintain the sepuration
between the national councils and RFE. While emigres should continue to
have an opportunity to speak to the peoples behind the iron curtain, they
should do so as individual patriots and not as representatives of a
council or of a political party. RFE, if it is to be an effective "voice"
to the satellite peoples, must necessarily keep free from petty intrigues
and political "empire building" currently being exhibited by the national
councils. Chould the national councils become the real symbols they were
intended to be, they could then play a significant role in RFL.
FECOAZNDATIONIS
The following policy and administrative recommendations are submitted
as essential to the successful operation of emigre affairs:
1) Folicy Recommendations
a. Maintenance of National Councils
During the foreseeable future, the structure of the
national councils will have to be maintained. It is
suggested, however, that their activities in this
country be limited to the functions mentioned above.
1
4%

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_60.jpeg ---
14-00000
Y
ta
f,
I'd like to
See this potential
assessed further.
For instance, do we
have collected information
on the reservoir
emigre manpower.
Paris
2
or do ine
Love to rely
022
independent WF3
for this How?
on C.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
-6-
SECURITY IN
s
b. Kelationship with the Department of State
The office for "migre Affairs" should 1) maintain close
contact with the area desks of the Department of State
and 2) moet jointly with members of the Department in a
CIA-State Coordinating Comittee, (see chart attached)
for the purpose of formulating policy on emigre matters.
c. Kelationship with NCFE
The office for "Emigre Affairs" should maintain close
supervision and control over the NCFE office in New
York and in Paris. This can be achieved only by having
integrated in NCTL's offices one or several high level
individuals working directly for CIA.
Detailed recommendations on the structure of the Office for "Emigre
Affairs" is appended hereto.
SEGREY
ELLEN STERN
34441***

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_58.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
}
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET-
izecutive Committee in New York often confer, and reach certain
agreements, with high ranking individuals in CIA and the Department
of State without consulting, or oven informing, anyone olce. This
has led to a great deal of confusion, duplication of work and, of
cource, embarrassment.
+
2) An office in New York which is poorly staffed and which has
made itself virtually independent of CIA guidance. (Due probably to
· the lack of proper guidance and control in the past, there is at ...
present a great amount of free wheeling in the New York office. The
members of the Executive Spittee seem to feel that they are an
autonomous unit rather than agents of their sponsoring office. Further-
more, dealings with the experienced politicians in exile from the
catellite states require a staff which is mature, has savoir-faire
and a broad background in Talkan politics. This is not procently the
cage.
3) A feeling among exigres that the promises and threats made by
NCFE are meaningless and that money will be forthcoming under almost
any conditions.
IV Focsible Courses of Action
Corfronted with the situation sketched above, it would appear that
incofar ae CIA is concerned, the following alternative cources of action
are possibles 1) Keep the present set-up; 2) withdraw support from
emigre affairs; 3) ask the Department of State to take over; or 4) make
certain changes along lines recommended below.
Since the present set-up is unsatisfactory for the reasons indicated
above, obviously the first alternative may be immediately dismissed. The
second alternative is not feasible because the peoples of the satellite
countries are important allies of the United States in the cold war and it
in to our interest to afford assistance to the principal hastern
European refugees and their major organizations. The State Department
cannot take over relations with the emigres because of the official
recognition given by the United States to the "Democratic Republics" of
Eastern Europe. The logical, indeed inescapable course for CIA to
follow, therefore, is to continue to deal with the most important
Eastern European erigres on the basis of eerimin premise which follows;
-- Fe
1) NCFE is an organization, set up by and subordinate to CIA,
(charged with emigre affairs as directed by the sponsoring office.
2) The exicre rousings in this country do not constitute govern-
ments in exile, but merely wits useful for the following functions:
a. Prestie l'se
To serve as a symbol of resistance to the subjugated
peoples behind the iron curtain. To provide speakers

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
-5-
SECRET
"
ensent
:
3
4
b. Essention of HOPE Activitice in Paris.
It is further recommended that a greater degree of
US control be effected over the vast reservoir of
emigre manpower now concentrated in Europe. The
expansion of, and tightened supervision over, the
HCL office in Paris would provide this control. Sch
It would additionally 1) provide a much-pooded proce
priest way for
outlet for the younger elements of the migration, reli
2) offret the attempts made by the French and the
british to use these elements, 3) to useful from
the psycholoical warfare aspect and also in
long-range planning of the literation of the aspbe
satellite states.
SUBZEL OF Noriented trousings
"
which wont be
-
candice
the Flushes utile
and the Count of the
are vingt.confertig
It is recommended that the activities of horizontal vent
groupings, such as the International Feasant Union,
will
the Christian Democratic Union, the Slavik-Mayer/acy tuiti
Groups, etc. be encouraged. Constructive work on
the part of the exiles from the satellite states
that would cut across national lines should be viewed
favorably and may well become the most constructive
element in the emigre political complex.
2) Administrative Recommendations.
There should be, in CIA, an office charged with the responsibility
for all enigre matters. While it is recognized that this entails a vast
amount of administrative work (budget, personnel, security, etc.), the
discussion that follows will be devoted only to the political aspects of
the work.
i
The terms of reference of this office for "Emigre Affairs" should
be, inter alia, to 1) formulate policy on emigre matters, soliciting and
bearing in mind the views of the CIA line divisions, the Department of
State and other offices of the United States Government, and 2) provide
direct policy guidance and control over the NCFE offices.
8.
Relationship with Other CI▲ Offices
The office for "Emigre Affairs" should act as an advisory
body and serve as a functional link providing the necessary
laison between the CIA line divisions and the National
Councils Division of NCFE. The office of "Enigre Affairs"
should likewise be kept regularly informed of all trans-
actions undertaken between the line divisions and NCFE.
SECRET
."
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_64.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
- 2 -
b. One or more high level individuals in the NCTE offices
should be CIA agents. While having authority for certain
spot decisions, they should be rec, oncible for all actions
to honourture in Lasilin, ton. There should be regular
contact between the RCFE offices and headquarters.
4. Handling of all other work related to emigre matters.
a. Sterilizing and distributing Zinnia reports.
b. Preparing memoranda on enigre matters.
c. Coordinating action cables with line divisions.
d. Maintaining extensive files on national council and
related eniɛre affairs.
SEST
i
i
:
:
185

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_63.jpeg ---
14-00000
16
:
1.
* pr
J. Wines
SECURITY INFORM
SECRET
ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PROPOSED OFFICE FOR
"EIGR AFFAIRS".
I. Orcunization
Chicf
Deputy Chief
Two Staff Assistanto
Two Socretarios
II. Functions
The overall function of the office for "Maigre Affairs" should be
the formulation and coordination of policy on national council and other
emigre affairs and the transmittance of such policy to NCFE.
1. Liaison and coordination with other CIA Offices.
a. Transmission of material from NCFE offices to line divisions.
b. Transmission of material from line divisions to NCFE.
´c. Coordination with the line divisions on all emigre matters in
which they have an interest. If the office for "Emigre
Affairu" is kept informed on the needs of the line
divisions, the "CFE should be able to perform functions
useful to the divisions.
d. To facilitate the dealings between the Office for "Imigre
Affairs" and the line divisions, there should be one
person in EE-2, S. and WE-3 designated as liaison officer
on emigre matters.
2. Liaison and coordination with the Department of State.
a. There should be a CIA-State Coordinating Committee, which
should meet regularly to discuss matters pertaining to
the national councils and emigre affairs.
b. Although a member of the CFL may occasionally be present at
a meeting of the Coordinating Committee, regular sessions
should be attended only by members of CIA and the State
Department. The system, which has been in effect during
the last four months, under which bi-weekly meetings have
taken place between a representative of the NCFE in
New York and the Department must be discontinued.
3. Supervision of the activities of the "CE.
a. The office for "zmigre Affairs" should be charged with the
supervision of the NCF office in New York sexi in Faris.
SEGALE
;

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_66.jpeg ---
14-00000
WE-3
Gimt
1
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CIA, STATE AND NCFE
BR-2
SE
DCI
ADPC
(IO
Office for
"Enigre Affairs"
NC FE
Paris
Office
New York
Office
Natl
Horiz.
Councils Groups
etc.
Dept. of State
EE
CIA-STATE
Coordinating Committee
M
Control
Coordination

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_65.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
:
Think
we should
Superimpose NC7 E as a
whole and fit this" office
Emigre affairs" into the
picture,
as
one
arm
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_67.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR: KAY E. MILLARD
FROM:
SUBJECT:
PHOMAS MYERS
Herman Moschnor
6 March 1952
-
Convicted Spy
1. Pursuant to our conversation, you are advised that the captioned
individual was convicted in the U. S. Court at Nurnberg on 31 January
1952 on a charge of espionage. U. S. Attorney developed information
which was turned over to us indicating that among other things Moschner
had been directed by the Czech intelligence service to procure
information about Radio Free Europe, especially bearing on the guarding
of the installations and the consequences of an act of sabotage.
Moschner was not an employee of RFE and the basis of the espionage
charge against him was that he had endeavored to obtain information
concerning personnel and activities of the CIC.
2. Through the courtesy of a friendly U. S. agency, we have
been provided with a copy of the targets which Moschner had been given
by the Czech intelligence service. I am attaching a copy of the list
of such targets and you will note that the activities of this individual
clearly reflect the interest of Czech intelligence in possible sabotage
of the physical installations of RFE in Munich. Further information
is being developed in this matter and I will advise you when I receive
same.
THOMAS MYERS
i
:
;
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_68.jpeg ---
14-00000
STRICTLY PRIVATE
APPENDIX "A"
COPY
ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF INFORMATION REGARDING RADIO PRZE EUROPE
ISSUED BY THE CZECHOSLOVAK INTELLIGENCZ SZIna.
The following are essential elements of informations
1. Plans of all RFE buildings and RFE transmitter stations.
2. Dimensions of antenna used and distance between antenna towers.
3. Phone numbers of transmitter stations.
4. Plans of all telephone lines, specifically lead-ins and terminals.
5. Relationship of one RFE building to another in an operational sense.
.
6. · Addresses and telephone numbers of all individuals connected with RFE.
7. Details of functions and operations of each transmitter.
8. The number of guards at each RFE installation, nationality of such guards,
and duty assignments and locations, whether accompanied by police dogs.
9. Number of civilians usually in RFE buildings at night.
10. How and what transmission operations are conducted at night.
11. Complete plans of electrical power lines and power supply at each
transmitter station.
12. How many rural policemen are located in the area of each transmitter
station, addresses.
13. Addresses and details concerning guard personnel at each transmitter
station.
14. Number and identity of persons working in all of EFZ and their addresses.
15. Distance of transmitter stations from rural police headquarters.
NOTE:
2/15/52
A certain amount of repetition in the above essential elements of
information may exist. However, they were submitted to me only
as notes taken from a highly classified report and therefore may
not be as exact as given by Moschner during his interrogation.
On Monday we shall attempt to get the entire report of Moschner's
statements regarding RFE and shall submit further pertinent details.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_69.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
"
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICA
IDENTIAL
TOP AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
ENTRAL
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP-
IQ
-
DD/P
i
DDCI
5
FRON
1
CO
3
2
APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
_ CONCORRENCE
REMARKS:
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
SECRET
INITIALS DATE
INITIALS DATE
TWB
24 Apr
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
SIGNATURE
RETURN
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
DISPATCH
FILE
This story of the Nagy affair as it was
related to 00 by Contact is pretty old hat, but
you might nevertheless find material of interest
in it.
TWB
TWB
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 19
CONFIDENTIAL RESTRICTED UNCLASSIFIED.
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_72.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
A
SECURITY INFORMATION
Hungarian Exile Activities
8. We shall follow up on this and shall keep you advised,
If you have particular points which you would like us to discuss
with Mr. Woles, please let us know.
J
B. M. ASHCRAFT
001 AD/O (1)
Chief, Pyschological Warfare Division, OPC (1) ✓
Chief, Cover Division/PLANS/050 (2)
SEUNET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_71.jpeg ---
14-00000
4.3
SLUNET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Tungarian Exile Activities"
4. The Hungarian group hopes to be a member of the Central and
Eastern European Committee which will be something of a coordinating
committee for the various yet-to-be-formed Satellite governments-in-
exile. A partial list of the members of this large Committee (all
of who also seen to claim that R/E is rotten) followe:
Ferenc Nagy, President
Istvan Barankovios
Josel Cerny
George Dinitroffe
Hasan Losti
Cornel Filo
Mikai Krek
Vlatko Nacok
Stanislaw Mikolajeayk
Stefan Csuaki
Augustin Popa
Vaclovas TsidsikaukaS
Constantin Visoianu
5. Mr. Heiss is getting the political plans of the Hungarian Group
and the Central and Eastern European Committee and will give them to is
when he receives them. Once he has given us this material, he hopes to
lot our field zen deal directly with the national group leaders. These
leaders hope to sell themselves and their ideas to CIA and have expressed
their willingness to supply CIA exlusively with intelligence information.
(he assume that this group's cooperation will be commensurate with the
amount of financial support which CIA gives them).
6. Our field representative has commented that this group may also
try to discredit RFE although "...most of these buss would be starving if
it were not for RFE help. They already have Lawyer Welas believing that
RVS is one of the most evil things going." ..we told these two Dr. Weiss
and Mr. beiner/ that we were interested in getting all possible information
on these groups and impressed upon then the feet that we could quarantee
no favorable action. It was also necessary to persuade them that Radio
Free Europe is not supported by our agency."
7. Paul Weiss maintains a New York law office at 369 Lexington
Avenue. Fo was born on 29 November 1911 in New York City and served in
the Infantry during World War II. later, he was in Military Government
in Korea. Els partner, Mr. Meiner, was born 20 April 1913 and attended
Harvard Law School.
ULUNET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_73.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
**
8. Jackson
Mr. Lang
i
AXCERPT FRO
TZER A
FURUARY 21, 1952, PROY SPUNCER
F
Second, my can plans, until I know when we are to
aee Ir. Lens and what the consequences of that interview
may to, I can of course make no definite travel arrangements.
I should like to re te Strasbourg and tal, with them there
about the enlargement plans for the College de L'Europe
Libre; I want to have a few days in Paris, if possible, to
catch up on developments in Royall't aroaj and 1 feel it
important to have about a week in Lisbon. Forgetting the
question of dates my itinerary would probably be Strasbourg,
Faris, Lisbon, Now York, and if there is to be any consider-
ablo delay before we can see Ir. Lanz I shall plan to co
to Strasbourg from Frankfurt, then return to Frankfurt and
then go direct to Faris. It would please me if I were able
to go back to New York in time to go to New Hampshire to
vote in the primaries on larch 11, but this may be an idle
hopo.
Third, our Frankfurt negotiations; as I cabled C.E.
we reached complete agreement on the technical basia,
covered by the draft licensing agreement.' Throughout our
discussions we were treated with the utmost courtesy and
consideration. The original craft submitted for our study
contained Leveral arbiguities and specific provisions which,
if literally construed mould defeat the purpose which both
sides seemed to have in mind. Our suggestions for changes
and modifications were accepted after a minimum amount of
discussion. whenever we made a valid point, the fact was
recognized at once by the others. Lick arrees with me that
one could not expect to receive any more courteous or
considerate treatment, and we were all very much pleased
by the atmosphere at the rinistry. You realized, of
course, that the technical side of the queation, is by no
zeans the complete picture, and it remains to be seen how
rapidly we can clear up the non-technical aspects.
If we
can have our Cinn appointment again tomorrow, I cught to
t- alle to have a cable in New York for your o ening Monday,
indicating the prospects, but if our appointment is delayed
until some time next week one of the local handicaps we
are encountering is a karneval-period or "Fashing" which
reaches its climax menday. Fashing is much more of a
celebration than George ashington's firthday, so lick and
I are willingly sacrificing our holiday tomorrow (strike
cut lick from the preceding clause because he tells me
that the German operation does not recognise G. #ashington's
birthday. When I asked hir if they had selected Fasting
instead because it lasted longer, he avoided a direct answer,)
so as not to get involved in a possibly long post-Fashing
hangover period. Seriously, very little work in Cone in
Jermany the day after the principal Fasching celebration
and no hope De can fet Batters were or less cleared up to-
perrow, but I shall not arce until I get a telephone call
this evening after return to fratifort.
->
-
;
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_74.jpeg ---
14-00000
EXCERPT ZROV ALTTEN TATEL FERNUARY 21, 1952, PROM SPENCSE
TRYNIX
8.3.
The Bonn telephone message came through.
Lens cannot see us tomorrow, or Monday or Tuesday--or,
perhaps, anytime. Frits got on the war path and said we
could not the that kind of brush-off and Lens, through
his assistant Herr Dr. Ahippersnapper finally said he had
turned full responsibility over to a Foreign Office
official, a Kin. Ir. Strohm whom Fritz knows. Frits then.
tried to reach Strohm but he was allegedly unavailable;
Fritz decended that word be got to him and finally it was,
Strohm rezarking, "Why, there is no hurry about this, is
there?" Strohm told Frits he couldn't see us before Thurs-
day. An appointment has therefore been made for us at the
Foreign Office in Bonn at 10 A.. next Thursday the 28th.
I haven't worked out my schedule between now and then but
shall probably do Strasbourg and Faris and then proceed
from Frankfurt to Lisbon assuming that to be possible which
I don't get know. Flease inform C.L. of the foregoing and
Bob Lang will ask to see this letter as Lick has just tele-
phoned to unich a teletype 'message for Fot referring to
this letter.
I am, I confess, rather concerned about these re-
cent developments. The "agreement" we reached with the
Bundespost on technical points has no significance without
a. parallel political clearance in Eonn, so speed with the
former has no meaning in the face of delay in the latter.
Tell C.l., therefore, that my ten-watt green light has
gained no wattage.
CC: Vr.
Jackson
Mr. Lang
-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_70.jpeg ---
14-00000
Chief, Operations Division, OPC
Attention: Fr. W. F. Rowland
Chief, Contact Division, 00
Hungarian Ixile Activities
3.
SECRET
Exocative Rogudry
RITY INFORMATION 2-541
29 February 1952
HH-196
A Hungarian Government-in-Exile which feels that it can
"awaken the spirit of resistance and result in piercing the Iron
Curtain and liquidating the Communists in Huntary" has teen formed
under the direction of Foreno Nagy. This group came to our attention
when Louis Goldstein, a New York jeweler, suggested that a represente-
tive of this Agency call on Paul Weiss and Les Weiner, New York lawyers,
who had been approached by Foren hagy regarding the organization of
this group. Mr. Woise furnished our New York office with information
regarding Mr. Sey's organisation,
2. Meabere of this group other than Macy are Ceza Teleki, Karolyi
Peyer, Zoltan Pfeiffer, Desso Sulyok, Zoltan Eay, Istvan Earankovica,
Albert Bartha, Paul Auer and áladar Szegedy-linszak. The objective of
this group is to form a government-in-exile which would combat Communiam
in Hungary, strengthen resistance, develop the underground, ship radio
parts and transmitters as well as arms, revive a good propaganda campaign,
raise troops and fan resistance in the event of war, and set up a texpo-
rory de festa government in hungary if the West wins. This group, which
claims to represent 83 per cent of the Hungarian people as of the last
free elections, would hold free elections as soon as possible and let
the people choose a new government. They want official recognition
as a Lovernment-in-exile and US Government financial support with the
control of funds handled by the US Government. (Our field representative
comments that: "This is the first of many groups probably being formed
in the hope of getting some of the Mutual Assistance $100,000,000.")
3. This group says that Radio Free Europe is a joke and a travesty
on the term "democracy", and that sosething should be done about it.
Members of the organisation clain that Communist propaganda is beazed
out by RFE and that the Munich office is staffed with the following
Masis: Emile Czonka; (Inu) Maori (phonetic); Aladar Kovacs; Laszlo
Eerei Andras (sekely; (fau) Zalaberi (phonetic); dejo Poharnuk and his
vife. Also, the following Communists are on the Munich staff: Josef
Kemani (phonetic); Zoltan sabo; (Thu) Mikes; Laszlo isabo.
SECRET
1
'
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
2.
robl
Extension of Yearks in
hard on september
18th, 17/1, ives the total number of these "loyal Americans"
au 20,000,000.--I think it is rather too high an estimate. van
if we would include all Jews from those areas the number could
hardly be higher than 15 million, this would be 107 of the total
population of the "nited states, This work seeking, econonie
omigration from our countries was mainly concentrated in the big
cities an! the great industrial or mining areas, of the sixteen
ast and #14-estern states of Pennsylvania, ew Jersey, Solaware,
Maryland, est irgi ia, Rw York, Connecticut, Rhode Island,
Hassachusetts, Michigan, Nebraska, chio, Indiana, Illinois, 18-
consin and vinnesota, In soua oi thone
those states these Europeans
comprise about on third of the population, This applies especially
to big cities such as chicago, etroit, Cleveland, Toledo, Pitts-
burgh, "cranton, Luffalo, ilkos Barro, Trenton, Newark, Camden,
New ritain, eto, no ho 1d also mention that not less than one
fifth of the big emigration managed to find work on farms--in
such states as hisconsin, Minnesoty, Illinois, Michigan, Hobraska,
assachusetts, and Now York.
"
"'
14 political importance of this great segment of Mmerican
population 15 steadily increasing in the last twenty years.
Nearly all the respective groups were concerned about the hone-
lanis of their fathers and grandfathers and became very active
during orld ar II. Although, with the succeeding generations,
third or even fourth, this interest has waned, due to the natural
weakening of ties with the "old countries"--these new Americans,
the sona and grandsons of the poor santral and astern European
-
'
ae
peasant emigranto are conscious of their ancestry. Educated in
American collages and universities, they are gradually emerging in
American public life; their old inhibitive inferiority complex is
rapidly disa gearing. Let us study the ashington "elephone -irectory.
It is astonishing that at loast every twelfth name is of central
bastern European desmont. I ab not as faalliar with other national
groups and their achievements, but as far as Polos are concerned, we
are proad to
Lo Save Mr. symczak as one of the governors of the Federal
Reserve, ater Pukowski the newly appointed -eputy .irector of RPC,
Hr. bruk the payor of Purialo and wr. Ceelusta 'ayor of Toledo. ?
an sure similar suco08803 can be claimed by otaer groups of our
Contral and astern surpean blow. net of these oricans are very
helpful if properly approached. have eard recently at a re-
coption of eneral or-komorowski a statement made by calor Alfred
S. leminski a "anocratic Con resen 'rom New Jersey who offered
18 willies to help the exiled leaders of all of our groups, in
our efforts to liberate our part of the world. mintlar statuhenta
have bɔɔn nade by other on ressman of lolish descont.
•
.
The cial advancement of Sur American brethren is visible
nearly in 11 sphero of American life, with a sole exception of
propacania 1.0. roan, radio, velovision, "ollywood, thou hoven
thero sose progres is to be tcticed. In such 11da ko hurch,
Rivers' 109,
o.ition the process of avancement is remarkable.
Amscica*.9 :: entral and astorn Aropean escent have proved to be
a irst class rollable clemant soldiers and
as citisem 0' 170
United Rates
the worl ara and the preannt wost danjore
ideological str. lo with 'ommuti#3,
-
ring
"
+

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_76.jpeg ---
14-00000
>
:
-
}
For Frelim. text license negot. between
NCFE and Bundespost subj. to Gor. polit. approval,
seet Bonn to State 1688 of 25 Feb. 152, C VR-265,
Confic Sec. Info., copy being retained by DCPY.
!

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_75.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
.
DRAFT:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
1-
February 1⁄2
TELEGRAM FROM THE HONCHABLE JOSEPH C. GREN
TO CU GHE-SAN O. K. ARES TRONG
2
NJe
I keenly regret to inform you that, upon further reflection and
upon the basis of information which has recently come to my attention,
1 consider it in-dvisable for me to address your Psychological Strategy
Conference, and that I find it necessary to ask you to release me from
speaking at your meeting on Saturday. When I was first asked to speak
about the significance of National Committee for a Free Europe and the
activities of Radio Free Europe, I understood that the Conference world
discuss propaganda and psychological warfare. I made from the release
issued by your o fice, that among the purposes of the conference nre the
presentation of definite plans of action to increase resistance movements,
and to aid the peoples of the Soviet nation and the Satellite States to
overthrow their regimes, as well as to establish a continuing organization
to carry out the programs developed at the conference. This release also
indicates that there will be full and open discussion of such matters and
that persons purporting to represent underground movements in Poland, tře
Baltic States, Russia, China, Koren, etc., will take part in discussions,
It is my personal view that it would be unwise to discusssmatters of
this sensitive and provocative character in open meetings, particularly
where programs of specific action are considered. It seems to me that
public duscussions of such matters and revelations of plans and prograzs
would not only expose and thus jeopardize the existence of any reinstance
movements which may be identified and described, as well as the lives of
the people participating, but would also provide quantities of adversz
prepaganda material for use by Soviet and satellite propaganda machines.
It is my conclusion that ro position and responsibilities as Chairman of
the National Committee for a Free Europe make it inappropriate for me to
speak before or lend my name to such a gathering because of the signifi-
cance which might be attributed to such appearance. I want to express –
full sympathy with the motivation of yourself and your co-sponsors, and
to point out in this connection that the 243 and objectives of the National
Committee for a Free Eurone, of which I am Chairman, are to keep hope alive
among the prisoner people the slave states and to provide assistance
to fugitives from Soviet tyranny. I especially desire that my decision
against appearing shall not be a cause of em arrassment to yourself or the
others concerned. I therefore su gest that you inform those who you belicse
should know, thatdie to unfortable circumstances I have found myself
unable to attend.
Orig:
-
DC/FT- for files
DO/P
LR
Henry Poore
chrono - 1
-1
->
for use is quite
SECRET
17. Wisner read to
Nr. Grew over long-
distance telephone
today and kc
latter said he would
send us the resage from
Princeton.
BJm

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_77.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
DUTY INFORGATI
18 February 1752
MEMORANDUM POR:
SUBJECT:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
"The 'Voice' and Radio Free Europe Complement
Each Other”
I
1. The attached leaflet was inserted as a supplement in
the January "Crusader", a newsletter which is sent out to the
8,000 regional chairmen of the Crusade for Freedom organisation.
It was prepared with the cooperation of the Voice of America
officers in New York and was reviewed by the P Area of the
Department of State.
2. It is intended to acquaint the regional Crusade
organizations with the facts about DCA and offset any critician
or unfortunate comparisons that may have sprung up during the
1951 campaign.
:
1
Attachments
As described above
Distribution:
Addresses -
Original
DT/P
ADPO
C/EE
1
C/SE
CATE
:
1
CTO
DCPY
RI
1
H. GATES LOYD
Deputy Chief
Psychological Staff Division
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_78.jpeg ---
14-00000
J
r
1
f
:
=
THE “VOICE" AND RADIO FREE EUROPE
COMPLEMENT EACH OTHER
Both Are Indispensable
"What's the difference between the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe?" "Why
is it necessary to have both the Voice and Radio Free Europe?" These are frequent questions
asked of General Clay and the other leaders of the Crusade for Freedom.
The Voice and Radio Free Europe are both vitally needed if we are to win the
Cold War.
They are completely separate organizations. Each performs a distinct function in the fight
against the gigantic Soviet propaganda machine.
The Voice speaks with the authority of the U. S. Government. It is financed by Govern-
ment funds.
Radio Free Europe was set up by private citizens. It is financed by millions of individual
contributions to the Crusade for Freedom.
Voice is World Wide
The Voice is a worldwide network, broadcasting in 46 languages over 75 transmitters. It
is the only American voice heard in the Soviet Union. Its 120 individual daily programs of
news, music, roundtables, commentaries, documentaries, service programs, etc., have a potential
audience of 300,000,000 listeners.
f
Radio Free Europe is much smaller. It concentrates on the captive countries behind the
Iron Curtain: Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Albania. Its transmit-
ters are in Western Europe.
The Voice speaks for the American people, spreading the truth about democracy, giving a
true picture of life in the United States, and spiking Moscow's lies about us. It reports in full
on official American acts and documents, presents news and world developments from our
point of view.
But Voice is not limited to Government pronouncements; it regularly reflects American
opinion as expressed in our press and radio. In a friendly way—with programs of informa-
tion and service—it promotes a better understanding of the United States in Europe, in Latin
America, the Far East and the Near East.
Crusader Supplement
January 1952
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_79.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
The VOA Around the World
and Around the Clock
WOOFFEETOI
AN FRANCISCO.
USA
CINCINNATI
TANG
MANIL
HONOLULU
8010
COLOR
MB
MEDIUM WAVE
SHORTWAVE
1
1
1
B
-10
+13
+10
+
+2
GMT
L
COLOMBO
NOTE: To determine Greenwich Mean Time
local time zone, add or subtract the
at the base of map from your loca
1
1 1
The Voice of America's Global Network of Broadcasting Facilities
This kualization of the world, on Mercator's Projection, aims to show at a glance how a vast
array of transmitters and relay stations carries Voice of America programs in 46 languages to
listeners everywhere.
For European countries the programs are transmitted from stations in the United States located
Dear New York City, Boston and Cincinnati, via directional antennas and with transmitters ranging
in power from 20,000 to 200,000 watts.
The transmissions are beamed toward Europe, where a network of relay stations picks up and
rebroadcasts the programs within dotted areas on the map. Shortwave relay stations are located at
Tangier, North Africa, and Woofferton, England, while medium-wave transmitters are located in
Munich, Germany, and Salonika, Greece.
Latin American programs are transmitted from shortwave stations located Dear New You
Boston, Cincinnati and San Francisco to all countries south of the United States.
To Far Eastern countries the programs are broadcast from high-powered trammitters (
near San Francisco, then relayed by shortwave transmitters at Honolulu, Manila and Co
(Ceylon) and by a medium-wave transmitter at Manila.
The map indicates a considerable overlap of radio coverage from the various transmitters.
times the overlapping areas indicate different language programs, and sometimes they indica
a single language program is broadcast on several wavelengths, in order to give listeners a ch
the clearest signal in a locality, Vertical lines indicate Time Zones, with GMT at Noon a
International Date Line as a dotted line.

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_82.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
}
COPY
Confidential
MEMORANDUM
TO:
Mr. Ton Fraden
FROM:
John Devine
SUBJECT:
"Crusader" Article on VOA
January 24, 1952
The cory for the proposed issue of the "Crusader" dealing
with the Voice of America has been reviewed in the Department
of State and has been approved. There are only two minor
corrections which are as follows:
1. Item 3 on page 2, Latvian should be added after Estonian.
2. Item 4 on page 2, Israel should be added after Portugal.
This is an encouraging move on the part of RFE and should be
very useful in getting VOA's story to a large segment of the
American public.
21

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_81.jpeg ---
14-00000
RESTRICTIO
In reply refer to W-185,
R
15 February 1952
Mr. Abbott Washburn
National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc.
110 West 57th Street
New York, New York
Dear Abbotts
Our friends across the street have reviewed and
approved the proposed issue of the "Crusader” which is
attached.
They request that the following minor corrections
be made:
Item 3 on page 2, Latvian should be added after
Estonian.
Item 4 on page 2, Israel should be added after
Portugal.
Sincerely,
John L. Damawood
Attachment
The Voice and Radio Free Europe Complement each other
both are indispensable
PY/IS/AGL:cve
Distribution:
Addressee - Orig.
DCPY
->
->
1
12-
CIO
PY/Ex- 1
PY/IS- 1
SD/RE- 2
RESTRICTED
SECURITY INFORMATION
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_80.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
7
:
Exiles Speak Over RFE
Radio Free Europe, on the other hand, does not portray America. It concentrates largely
on what is taking place within the slave. countries. Over its transmitters Poles speak to Poles,
Hungarians to Hungarians, etc. They speak as "the voice of Free Poland," "the voice of Free
Hungary." etc. They look at their people's problems through their own eyes.
r
· RFE programs specialize in identifying and denouncing Communist informers and collab-
orators, sending back messages from escapees, and exposing the corruption and crimes within
the Red regimes.
In their broadcasts to behind the Iron Curtain, the Voice and Radio Free Europe have es-
sentially the same aims: to keep alive the hope of liberation; to let listeners know that they
have not been forgotten; to stiffen their resistance against their Communist oppressors; to ex-
pose the fraudulent basis of authority upon which the Moscow-dominated regimes rest.
Both combat Communism and the persecution of religion and denial of human rights.
Both report the superior industrial power and fighting potential of the free world over the
Soviet-enslaved world.
1951 Year of Progress for "Voice"
During the past year the Voice of America:
1. Stepped up daily programming from 30 to 50 hours daily.
2. Made progress in overcoming Soviet jamming.
3. Increased its broadcasts to behind the Iron Curtain, adding the "splinter" languages of
Georgian, Armenian, Azerbaijani, Tatar, Turkestani, Latvian, Lithuanian and Estonian.¸
4. Inaugurated programs to Albania, Finland, Israel and Portugal in their respective languages;
to China in two additional dialects, Swatow and Amoy; to Japan and South and Southeast
Asia in Hindi, Urdu, Thai, Burmese and Malayan.
5. Became more outspoken and hard-hitting. One of the principal themes was the support of
the UN effort to repel the Chinese and North Korean Communist aggression in Korea.
Major attention was given to exposing the fraudulent Soviet "peace" drive.
6. Began work on the "Ring Plan" approved by Congress, which calls for a network of power-
ful relay bases girdling the globe.
I
7. Created “Vagabond"-a ship equipped with a transmitter, so that radio broadcasts may
be relayed from shipboard.
8. Received 318,000 letters from overseas listeners-an increase of 35% over 1950.
9. Needled the Communists so successfully that Radio Moscow and Soviet regional stations
doubled their attacks against the Voice.
:
;
i
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000❤
1143
•here are about six million ricana Polish descent in
the United States. They insist approximately one half of the
estimated total of the Central and astern ropean grey. lovaka
and Ukrainians compate for second place, having about one sillion
each, in the United States and Canada, Lithuanians and ungarians
seem to be next in line. It may be taken for granted that all of
our national roups have at least a hundred thousand erican brothers
in this country. It is,
It is, and it should be a tremendous asset in our
strucule for liberation. To take my own relish group for example it
lo onccuraring to know that there are already on longrosenon of polish
Cantasyon atorrats, three cmdličans Tadouse chrowi
Concurst of chican, speaking at the Pulaski rally in fetreit de-
clared a few weeks ato that "all congrasson of Polish descent, regard-
less of party affiliations, are united in so far as the cause of tree
Poland in concerned." According to him, as reported by the Holish
Amarican Journal Ho. 47--Vol. XI of sovember 24th;. 19 1--* olish
Amerio an solons are working together to invalidate the shorar and
Yalta agreements and to persuado the United States lovernment to go
on record favoring the present western boundaries of roland." of
other groups lovenians have no Congressman of their dessent--young
lovenians have one "ongressman of
and prominent pr. letnik from the fourth District of vi mosota.
Our tech friends can claim an old experienced member of the Foreign
Affairs Committee Mr. Sabbath--Resocrat from Illinois, born in
Prague, and another Con,ressman Ar. Stefan died recently.
there never was any U.. Senator who would claim 'entral or
European ancestry, although enator Langer was born of sochealovak
Werman parents. ormer Zover or Stasson claims "soch ancestry and
lovernor Lausche Blovenian ancestry. There are several
-
Up to now
Mastorn
on ressNOR
of Jewish extraction who wore oither born in our part of the world
or are of the Cantern uropean parentage.
a of them way to also
considered as potential Friends of our 18490.
-
A typical organisation in which we should be interested in our
work is that of Polish Amrican Engross, as ablished early in 1944
with the main unose to Help oland in regaining her torty and at
tao same time to serve in the tent way the long range interests of
the United States by pointing out the dangers
imperialism.
f Communism and Russian
"y taking such a determined stand at the time thun the
close friendship with the so-called great astern Ally was preached
in ashington, they have rendered a valuable service to this country.
Polish American on rens is n sort of federation of all i was of
iolish American organtine, sunt er thee coing of
companies with rollsh national Alliance.
million of capital)
7412,500 embers and 70
no the most powerful.
3.
cational, or church and veteran
(there are cultural, udu-
roupo,
strugalo for Justice for .oland.
They joined to other in a
rolish-iserican Congress as the
cooperation of about 50, olish-American newspapers in this country,
•
no
course insurance
Studying the problem I found that there oxtet parallel organiss-
tions of other national To pa.
Their structural basis are also vory
similar. : ! became better acquainted with the American tehtarian
Lederation. Though orianised as long ago as 1905 at leveland Convention,
+
nited
ow has among its principal Alor and purposes
the Constitution and laws of the
*I apport--within
movements slaing to bring about independence for juntary se well as
tates--with all its lonjo
liberty and well being for its maple and to do everythine pepeible to
protect the husen ribs and oitisonship of the
persone outside of magary."
unerian cispla aced
As the olish ortation is
;
!

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_83.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
he
5.2 14
166DORA
CIDENTAL
COPT
SECURITY FOR_AI..
A TRUE COPY OF
THE SIGNED ORIG-
IHAL.
nap
ACTI
ith
FROM: Aniara
1370
TO:
Secretary of State
86
NO;
717, rebri, & p.m.
CONTROLS 2805
dec'd
Februar 7. 1957
1:12 a.m.
0
K
p
CH
Das
In view well-known Tury sensitivity (DEPTEL 642, Jan 31)
E-B doubts that PE proposel ald by evorably acted upon
by Turk Govt.
te also believe any such stproach as contemplated by RS
might sericusly jeopardize possibility Turk seceptance
VGA relay base proposal.
Repret delay in reply caused by garble in DE TEL requiring
service.
IT:20
I
!
1
1
CONFIDENTIAL
SECURITY UPORATION
i
BCCHES
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_84.jpeg ---
I
14-00000
TICH
7 February 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Project TFTONIC: Mid-European Studies Center,
American Personnel
Attached hereto is a copy of subject list as of
20 November 1951.
JWB
per NBV
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Attachment on original only
[PTED
Akan t
a

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_87.jpeg ---
14-00000
American Personnel
:
-3-
countries by working through American education
system on all levels, coordinating research in
this field.
2 SECRETARIES

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_86.jpeg ---
}
!
i
i
14-00000
American Personnel
:
-2-
MESC EDITOR
--
responsible for the translating, rewriting, and
editing for publication of all manuscripts produced by exile
researchers.
Names
Salary:
Hugh Corbett
Qualifications: BA Oxford; Major, British Army;
intelligence officer in Yugoslavia and Albania;
former editor, Rinhard and Henry Holt; former
editor and chief, Office of Military History, the
Department of the Army.
$7,000
CHIEF OF THE ADMINISTRATION SECTION
-
responsible for the fiscal
control, supply, file control, and general administration.
Salary: $4,000
4 TYPISTS
-
total salaries
-->
$10,660
4 SECRETARIES
1 CLERK-TYPIST
-
total salaries
--
$13,780
:
->
Salary
-->
$2,600
1 LIBRARIAN Salary
-
--
$3,120
1 RECEPTIONIST & ASSISTANT LIBRARIAN - salary
1 OFFICE BOY-MESSENGER
--
$3,120
-
salary
--
$2,340
-
salary
$2,660
-
rewriters, script typists, etc.
-
total
$10,720
1 SWITCHBOARD OPERATOR
3 EDITORIAL ASSISTANTS
salaries
--
Positions not yet filled:
1 RESEARCH SUPERVISOR
--
1 PROJECT MANAGER for the Textbook program in charge of
collecting, evaluating, and revising existing Iron-Curtain
country pre-1939 textbooks for post-liberation use. Super-
vising preparation of new texts where revision of old ones
would be insufficient.
1
1. PROJECT MANAGER for American education section
--
responsible
for promoting knowledge of and interest in European satellite
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_85.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
:
I
:
;
WID-EUROPEAN STUDIES CENTER
American Personnol
November 25, 1951
-
ASSISTANT TO THE DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF INTELLECTUAL COOPERATION
AND ADMINISTRATIVE HEAD OF MESC responsible to Director for exile
research program, textbook program, American education program,
Editorial Department, and administrative oporations for Studies
Center located at 1: West 57th Street, 11.7.C
Name:
Stetson 3. Holmes
Qualificationas AB Rutgore;
AB Rutgore; Marine Corps, Major:
Comptroller, Pope-Brooks Foundation, Inc.
Salary: 46,500
-
supervises and
DIRECTOR OF DANUBIAK INQUIRY; RESEARCH SUPERVISOR
controls the research efforts of approximately 40 eziles.
Jacob Hoptner
Name:
Salary:
Qualifications: AB University of Pennsylvania;
MA and Ph.D. candidate, Columbia; chief of American
Red Cross Vission to Yugoslavia.
$5,000
RESEARCH SUPERVISOR
-
supervises and controls the research efforts
of approximately 20 exiles.
Name: John H. Woodall
Qualifications: PA and MA, Duke University; Ph.D.
candidate, Columbia; CIC, France.
Salary: $1,200
--
PROJECT MANAGER FOR AVERICAN SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM and temporary
supervisor of textbook project as scholarship project manager
screens applicants and supervises the activities of 37 exile scholar-
ship students in American universities and colleges. Temporarily in
charge of 14 exiles doing preliminary work on textbook project.
Supervises the research efforts of 7 exiles.
Name:
Maurice J. Downey
Qualifications:
AF, MA, and Ph.D. candidate, NYU,
majoring in education; infantry, U.S. Army.
Salary:
$5,000
d.
F
t

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_89.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
30 January 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR, SPECIAL ASSISTANT FOR INSPECTION AND REPORTS
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Radio Free Europe Proadcasts Regarding the
Czech Currency Reform
D/P Memorandua to DCPY of 16 January 1952,
Same Subject
1.
At the risk of making this memorandum overly long, a review
of the cable traffic on the above subject appears desirable. According
to information available to this office, the campaign to take the
psychological initiative in connection with the rumored reform of
currency of Czechoslovakia was first proposed by FE Division on
30 December 1951 in cable to Frankfurt and Munich (OUT 96920) as
follows:
"8.
Persistent rumors claim Crech currency reform imminent.
Hungary allegedly printing new Czech currency. Long New Year
holiday appears suitable for reform.
b. Request all information this subject forwarded to Fran
and funi.
0. Believe general knowledge rumored reform to Czechs
would harass government, cause excessive buying.
d. Suggest Czech operation out of Germany exploit theme
soonest in 57OHODNE HLASY and/or pamphlets or other media
emphasising:
(1)
Economic and political dependency Csechs on
Russiars and consequent disadvantages.
(2) Instability Crech economy.
(3) Advisability population unload cash for goods,
If white Legion prepared sugrest exploit theme along
lines paragraph d.
?. Kuni, Suggest you request Radio Free Furope also
exploit thens
2. On 2 January 1952, OPC/OSO Munich wired Frankfurt (IN 10446)
the following message from William (riffith, Policy Advisor for Fadio
Free Purope at Munich:
Radio Free Europe
1
I
t
1
1
|
W

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_88.jpeg ---
14-00000
n
>3
1
45 Fab 52
doms:
hoose ends are
do are here
as on a
clipped
skein
If yarn,
het:
Recommendations
are
certainly sount-
and the clue to the trouble
seems to be in para 8 first
then in para 9.
Para 8
No one,
I'd guess,
t
was on the job in Munich when
Frank Lindsay's priority cable (I clicked)
4 Jan arrived there either
Fri 4 Jen or satdee 5 Jan. If so,
I'll bet RFE would have done one
things: 1) accepted the advice
62
ar
2) delayed in order to
check with R4E hdf NY
Para 9: Of
course EE should
clear cadies on R&E with a
colles
particular
croon
here. And that
Hance
Gerson with RIEN.G. in necessary
Casco like this.
i

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
3.
t
*.
-
4
dominated by the vigorous and colorful personality of Charles
Resmarck fros icago an is the funjarian odoration by its.
enorvetic xivo Dorotery tephan Balogh from ashington,
The
minian Yongress Comittee of America is another very
active body under the chairmanship of young doonorist (r. Lov
Dobriansky from Seorgetown `n versity.
in
-
-
4
.
The above mentioned thris organisations together with the
Byelorussian Amrican Association, An rican arpato=8” Congress,
United Amarican Creations, and the Slovak League of Aerica are
sponsoring a Federation of ricana of Central and East European
escent, ith the leadquarters at 1:2h ya Street, K.H., deshington
which is at the anke time the H...
anke time the M... of the Amrio&r="unarian
odoration. It is a young organisation in its initial period of
ambitious stivities. Its officora ulected on April 1951 at the
Hudson notel
o fuck conference aro Stophan . Thaich (Carpatho-
Ruthenian)-president, .r. Lev obriansky (of Ukrainian descont)
Vice President, Charles kommarek (of Polish descant-Treasurer.
Hembers of the Moard of irectors, Stephen . balogh of Hungarian
descent), John Liohayonack, Philip Hrobak--Recording ˝aëratary,
Ur. Lekins (of Latvian descont) Hav. Milvije rubisic (of Croatian
descent) and Stephen J. Skubik (or Ukrainian descent)--bureau
Lanager. Joseph A. Jackovics (of "lovak descent, was hederation's
Secretary General but accused by other officers for is tendency to
turn the ederation into a more tool of Katublican Party machine he
was forced to resi ¿N. It is not to be overlooked that the lacoration
is at the noxent under strong "krainian influence. The offioors of
the Woard o? "Trectors couplan that r. osmarok Lover attended a
mecting of theirs and that Pr. Charles þurke from the ashington
Office of the jolish American longress destinos only in the character
of an obeerver.
is al sence de facto of the olish-rican
;
Sundress
apparently hampers to a large extent the adoration's activities.
(The reason for this alsonco mill to explained orally).
→
According to an official Statanent of Alan and principles of
Todoration of imorleans of Central and last uropean escent aducted
at the "oard of irectors Fueling held in Sashington en August 17,
19.1 there are as follows:
and
1. To exert every offort to defend the Constitution of our
American ay life.
t
Ta en ate and oxorcise every wessure of o'fort
resource toward the doalsivo defeat of austian oxpuniant
imperialism which in its renomu is essendo os a crial threat to
the moral and intellectual brioian foundations of western civili-
sation in which la posited our pricelusa iberican way of life.
A
-
2. To coordinate and implement the conson and al activities
of the numerous nombor or a irations represented herein ithin the
scope of a unified sol:sical action oriented toward the ystemstia
realisation of this basic objective and the #imultan world
extension of the spiritual and nence, any ntinuation of the serving
of ocuplaints will simply a gusture of deantorial Llessings
be
engendered in our Fill of sights, the formila of self-determined
freedom and the tlantic Charter.
e

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_91.jpeg ---
14-00000
N
i
1
"economy closer own and continuing deterioration economic structure
Sechoslovakia.
b. Pelieve methods aimed force postponement or abandonment
should be confined suggestions and left discretion populace.
Possibility rebuttal campaign and disssfection ple seen if plan
abandoned following unloading cash and huge buring spree."
b. în Friday 4 January 1952, OPC cabled Munich (OTT 97623);
"Suspend action outlined reference pending instructions which
follow soonest."
5. on 5 January 1957 this suspension was ampliñsi as follows to
Frankfurt (OUT 99085) with copy to Munichi
"While considerable evidence currency reform my develop de
not wish embark on operation until more certain of facts and know
more about your plans for handling it. Advise any additional”
information you able obtain possibility ourrency reform and send
outline contemplated operational program including channels
dissemination and thazes."
6.
Om Honday 7 January 1952, the following cable was received
from Punish (IN 11619):
Reference too late.
b. Instruct. "
Program beyan 0500 7 January,
7. On 9 January 1957 at the request of EP Division, we called
Mr. Mahool, Assistant Director of RFP in New York, who advised that he
had had no instructions to suspend the Czech currency program. He said
that Kr. C. ". Jackson nai cabled to RFE, Munich on Saturday, 5 January
1952, to go ahead with the program if they were satisfied it was a bona
fide there and would not backfire. At our request, T. "ahcol sent the
following teletype massage to Munich, RPT:
-
mid you continue Czechoslovakia currency (program) beyond
January 7th as outlined teletyped prorras content Mh. Our
friends advise one ovnsiderable doubt on part information
gathering friends here that it happened or will happen. Two
that information gathering friesis advised Munich representative
to Sell PVP Munich to hold off. Assure you only wans ahead 7th
on Munich information gathering friends advice and okay.”
To the foregoing

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_90.jpeg ---
14-00000
--
i
SECRET
Radio Free Furope reports indicate probably Czech
currency refors scheduled for early 1952 affecting larger notes
and with at least 50% devaluation.
b. MB concurs this estimate situation.
c. Request comments on plan which propose submit Radio Free
Europe New York for approval; Large campaign reporting above as
information from inside stating it latest regime attempt defraud
inhabitants telling listeners they can themselves force postpone-
cent or abandonment reform by:
(1)
Changing all 1,000, 500, 100 notes for smaller.
(2) Puying goods getting rid money.
d. Estimated result buying panic flight from crown.
Advantages:
(1)
Increase economic erisje.
(2) Disrupt regime plan.
(3) Quaranteed propaganda success (if reform Radio Free
Europe helped evade if none helped postpone.)
:
f. Risks Pust be sure estimate situation as planned campaign
only possible once.”
Later that same day, another cable (IN 10526) qunted Griffith as
follows:
Intend all-out one week campaign beginning ↳ January.
b. Roquesting National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc.
approval Radio Free Furope channels.
e.
Time element forbids waiting.
d. Pass to C. F. Jackson.”
Mr. C. D. Jackson in New York on 2 January 1952, received a similar
message direct from his people in Munich who had been alerted in response
to paragraph f. of EE Division's cable of 30 December 1951 above. The
undersigned happened to be with Mr. Jackson in New York that day, and
at his request obtained telephonic confirmation regarding the above
exchange of messages. Accordingly, Fr. Jackson told his people to go
shead with their operation.
3. on 3 January 1952, OPC/OSO Frankfurt cabled (I* 10728) their
concurrence of the all-out exploitation of the suggested thems as follows:
RE MINI 6280 (IN 10446) concur all-out exploitation
these as another regine attempt defraud Czechs, best approach.
Should stress fovist ruidance planned reform in need bring Csech

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_93.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
#
SECRE
BOY HA.
b. All cables bearing on the subject be coordinated with
PY Division, or that branch having responsibility for NCPE
problems.
Coordination and clearance with the Department of
State be arranged by the area division before any sucreation
for exploitation gets out to the field.
d. The command channel for giving instructions to AFB
be clarified so that messages intended for their overseas
staff will first be cleared with their New York office, which
clearance will then be indicated in any messages going out
over OFC facilities.
12. In view of the interest taken in this matter by the
office, it is suggested that this memorandum be forwarded to DD/2
with any comments you care to make.
DCPY/HGL Inl
Distribution,
Addressee
PY/CIO
PT/IS
DCPY
RI
-
Original
-1
rr
R. CATES LLOYD
Deputy Chief
Psychological Staff Division
"

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_95.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
{
:
<
i
i
:
January 29, 1952
:
Dear Abbotts
I have just been informed over the telephone
that Earle Rogers. of Counsel Services, Inc., has called
a meting of the Crusade for Freedom Committee in this
city, and has failed to consult me in any way in this
matter.
-
This has resulted, as usual, in causing
utter confusion in the minds of everyone, and bodes no
good for the Crusade in this city nor for the sponsoring
oryamination the National Commi tue for a Free Europe,
for mich the Crusade is operating. In your letter of
December 7, 1951, to Hr. Hulbert T. Bisselle, Chairman of
the Crusade for Freedon in the District of Columbia, you
designated mò as, Director of the Washington, B.C. office.
As I have received no instructions from you to the con-
trary, I have presumed this situation to be continuing.
The fact that Mr. Rogers would proceed in a
matter of this kind without consultation with this office,
and without being commissioned by you to undertake such a
moeting, is most disturbing. This is the sort of thing
that will really kill the Crusade for Freedom in this city.
I shall hope to discuss this matter with you
when in New York on Thursday.
Sincerely yours,
10. Abbott Washburn,
Executive Vice-Chairman
Crusade for Freedom,
4 West 57th Street,
New York, ¾.Y.
Robert J. Moore

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_92.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEDALT ...
:>
A
To the foregoing he received the following reply:
"Czechoslovak ourrency (program) is continuing in a restrained
manner. We are prepared to take credit if it doesn't happen.
Munich representative did not advise us postpone until after mid
7th. Went ahead on Munich information gathering friends local rep.
Put we had their best advice and blessing on this one.”
8. According to the foregoing teletype exchange, RFE Munich were
not advised until after mid-day Monday, 7 January 1952, of the contents
of OPC's cable of Friday, ↳ January 1952, suspending the action pending
further instructions. It would also appear that oPC, Munich, advised
RFE to proceed.
9. The undersigned would like to point out that none of the three
outgoing cables (OUT 120, OUT 97623, CO7 93083) quoted above, ware
07
coordinated with the Psychological Staff Division who have the primary
responsibility for all matters concerning #CIT. and RFI. Had we known
about the decision to suspend on 1 January 1952, we would have been able
to advise RPE in New York in plenty of time to call off the operation.
In this connection, a subsequent message from Kunich statos that RFE
does not consider that their overseas staff is subject to commands of
OPC stations, the command channel running only from NCPE New York,
10. Dn/r's manorandum of 16 January 1952 on this subject refers to
the Director's recommendation that RFP be prepared to play this these
either way, taking credit for either having prevented the reform by
premature exposure if nothing is done, or having warned the people in
time to protect themselves if their currency is devaluated. As indicated
in Oriffith's message of 2 January 1952, BFT was aware of this double ap-
proach from the start and has been taking the "ge prevented it" line in
the occasional references which have been made to the currency problem
in the past three weeks.
.
11. To avoid such confusion in the future, it is recommended that,
a.
Before a theme is referred to RFF overseas for exploitation,
or even brought to their attention for consideration, it be given
to PY Division not only for review here in Orc but also for dis-
cussion with the interested people in AFE's New York office.
b. All cables
-4-

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_94.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONFINITIAL
1 enorandum
To: Nr. 0. E. Hadwood
From: H. H. Prunty
1
SECRET
January 29, 1952
The enclosed letter copy is self-ex·laratory.
It confirma,
in my mind, all the worst suspicions that I have had regarding
this public relations firm in conreation with the Crusade for
Freedom. That is one thing.
The fact that they would proceed, even if they had been
commissioned to call this meeting for the Crusade for Freedom,
without consulting the National Committee office, on whose
behalf they are supposed to act, is, in my opinion, assuming
alarming proportions.
Either the Crusade for Freedom works on behalf of the
National Committed, or it does not.
This is the sort of thing that will really kill tho Crusade
for Freedom in the city, and is the Thale on a mole series of
similar incidence.
n.P.
311952
JAN 31 1952
SECRET
1
# 11

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_97.jpeg ---
14-00000
congestione
:
January 28, 1952
Executive Requiry
-
2-7786
:
•
:
**
Dear Allen:
This letter concerns the matter which I discussed with you
briefly last week.
For some months past both the officers and directors of the
NCFE have been concerned as to what protective steps could be taken
in behalf of foreign nationals working for Radio Free Europe in
Germany under conditions which might arise in certain eventualities.
I attach copy of a letter bearing on this matter which was
written by Lang to Gates Lloyd on November 5, 1951. It gives a
concise cutline of the problem and suggests a solution of the same.
To date, as far as I know, we have not been able to secure any
assurances that this is being taken care of. If, us we have been
informed, the Army authorities in Germany are willing to help upon
receiving clearance from the Department of Defense, we feel every
effort should be made to implement this promptly.
Apart from the very real present and potential future value of
the foreign nationals in the group, the Committee feels that it has
a definite moral obligation to seek the same degree of assist nce
and protection for them as would be afforded United States citizens
under the conditions referred to.
Personally, I feel this obligation is a broader one which ex-
tends to this Government is well.
Last Thursday when we were discussing this question in New
York, Joe Grew was ruch interested and said he would be glad to assist
in any way possible. We all felt, however, that this is not a matter
which the Committee can take up direct with the Defense Department or
other Government agencies here and that it can only be brought to a
proper solution through action on the part of the Director or yourself.
Please be good enough to take this matter under consideration
and give us the benefit of your advice.
Yours
JBH fa
i
1

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_99.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
STRICTLY PRIVATE
-2-
May I therefore request that this matter be given your inmediato
and urgent attention. So far as we can tell, and we have gone into
this subject very exhaustively, all that is needed from this side is
a declaration of interest in the entire stuff on the part of the
Department of Defense.
:
}
!
i
$

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_98.jpeg ---
14-00000
<
STRICTLY PRIVATE
37
5 November 1951
}
{
:
:
i
Dear Mr.
As you know, RFE has, at the present writing, some 1000-1100 ·
people in Germany. They are largely concentrated in Munich and its
environs, although some are scattered in and around the Frankfurt and
Heidelberg region. The staff is composed of Americans, Czechs,
Slovake, Hungarians, Poles (at an early date), large numbers of German
Housekeeping and engineering personnel, plus a few French, Swiss,
Belgians, British, etc. Full details on the disposition of the staff
are available in Munich and have been turned over to EUCOM in an effort
to interest EUCOM in the most serious problem which faces us today
that of evacuation in the event of a move by any of the Russian armies.
-
Through Lt. Co. Ciccolella we have been fortunate enough to
have cur American personnel included in the evacuation plan of the
Munich Post Command. At this writing, however, we stand to lose our
extraordinarily capable, well trained and completely western-oriented
foreign staff.
ZECOM, on its own, has done all that it can but needs a directive
from the Department of Defense in Washington to the effect that the
PFE staff is to be considered a "war asset" and given a high priority
on the evacuation schedule. This priority should include the foreign
nationals who have been trained into the PFE effort since without them
whatever agency which would take over the RFE staff would be completely
lost.
Our investigations, and very considerable work done in the field
on this subject, prove that EUCOM is more than willing to take upon
itself this additional evacuation burden if so directed by the Depart-
ment of Defense.
This is a matter of extreme import nce not only to us but to who-
ever will inherit the task of influencing the satellite ureus when and
after the Russian armies have moved into western Europe. RFE has proved
that it is the Czechs, Hungarians and the Poles who can best do a
psychological warfare job. Without their complete participation we
would be lost in this "peacetime" effort, and without their future
participation whoever inherits cur task in time of war would be equally
lost.
i
:
STRICTLY PRIVATE
:

--- Image 104-10226-10023_page_96.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
Registry
02-1786€
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across sty
and each tom mænt numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before furtre' wring This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
NO.
CIO
:
DATE
3 April 52
10
1.
DATE
ROOM
KO
REC'D
Mr Brown
Mr
FWD 5
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
1 pr. th
I have seen. Mr.A.
COMMENTS
Coordination to he
WP/PM/ augustine) panties for minor indicated on greens
2.
EE
Mr Pallabury
Mr. Droller
2.
Mr. Fredericks
1Apio.
has
/nk
Mr. Schreyer
Juz
V
1379
B.
8
ADPC
DD/P
DDCI
7.
0.
C10
10.
8.
april
Gu
(Incoming ltr 28 Jan. attached).
Original of attachment (1tr to
Min Miller) will not be dispatched
until notification that John Hughes
letter has been signed.
apie pie cost 5 Her heen signed
8/142/2268/1
He has been seul
to" Min
Min!"
ABV
10 April 52
See Chrono reply
gaper:
12.
1
!
13.
14.
15.
746197
FORM NO. 81–10
FEB 1950
SECRET
P-2215