

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_1.jpeg ---
400000
104-10062-10062
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
:
In Reply, Please Refer to
File No.
UNITED STATES
TES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Newark, New Jersey
August 19, 1960
LAZ
SECRET
f: SPINOS
LAZARO EDDY ESPINOSA BONET
ESPIONAGE - CUBA
NK T-1,
a Cuban refugee who is in a position to
furnish reliable information, advised as follows:
F
-
On August 4% 1969, the source was contacted
by telephone at his place of employment in Carlstadt, New Jersey,
by Lazáre Eddy Espinosa Bonet, Third Secretary to the
Cuban Mission to the United Nations (CMUN). Espinosa¬
requested the source to meet him at 11:00 AM, August 5}}
1969, on the corner of Bronx Park East and Allerton
Avenue, Bronx, New York. The source went to designated
meet area on August 5, 1969
on August 5, 1969, arriving at approximately
10:50 AM and remaining until 11:25 AM. No attempt to
contact source was made during that interval.
On August 11, 1969, source's wife received a
telephone call at the source's home, in Union City, New,
Jersey, from an individual who did not identify himself.
A message was left for source which instructed him to
appear at the previously mentioned meet location at
11:00 AM, August 12, 1969.
The source arrived at the meet site at the
intersection of Bronx Park East and Allerton Avenue,
Bronx, New York, at approximately 10:30 A!!, whereupon he
was immediately contacted by Espinosa, who had been
waiting in a parked car on Allerton Avenue. Espinosa
and source proceeded on foot a short distance toward the
interior of Bronx Park and sat down on the grass in a
shady area. Espinosa took out from a small handbag which
he was carrying a Sony Miniature Tape Recorder which
measured approximately 9 inches by 4 inches by 3 inches.
The tape recorder was placed between the two on the grass
as they talked. The source observed approximately 20 smäll
reels of tape in the bag carried by Espinosa.
SECRET
GROUP
( this seems to be a different SHOUDT 1
source than the prior
201-816438
Excluded from automatic
Cuva - 47 things downgrading and
declassification
535-00-47
#5615

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
LAZARO FEY ESPINOSA BONET
SECRET
operations in Africa as well as the Miami area. He was
especially interested in whether the source knew any
dates of forthcoming infiltration runs into Cuba in which
Romero might be involved.
(Espinosa) mentioned Raul Villaverde and asked
ff
the source if Rafael Villaverde is the brother of Raul.
He further questioned the source whether or not Raul
is still a CIA instructor in the use of explosives.
The fact that Raul was in any way connected with instruction
in the use of explosives was never mentioned previously
by source in his report and must have been obtained by.
Espinosa from other sources.
a
The source happened to mention "La Osa",
nickname for a past team member for infiltration runs
✓nto Cuba. Referring to "La Osa", Espinosa interrupted
and stated "Oh, Filiberto Leon Delgado," Source had
forgotten the true name of "La Osa" and said that this
identity must have been Arnished to Espinosa through
other sources.
Also asked of the source was whether Justo
✓ Luis Llorett, a colleague of source, was still operating
for CIA. The source replied he did not know, inasmuch as
he had been too long removed from Miami area to be accurate
in his reply.
Espinosa made inquiries on the following
individuals with whom the source had been thought to
associate in Miami area; specifically, he wanted to know
any background information and whether or not the individuals
were being directed by CIA:
Otto (Last Name Unknown), previously of
operational interest to CIA in the Miami area.
Javier Souto, previously a principal agent
in the Miami area for CIA.
Edgar Sopo, active in anti-Castro radio
broadcasts to Cuba from the Miami area.
Manuel Artimes, a leader in Bay of Pigs
Invasion and subsequently connected with anti-Castro
organizations, including MRR.
3
SECRET

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
LAZARO DADY ESPINOZA DOWN
✓ Arturo
SECRET
Arturo Fallam, performed infiltration operations
into Cuba with source. (Espinosa specifically indicated that
source was to attempt to make contact with fallan to get any
information of value when in the Miami area.
Dr. Rafael Holina Salvucedo, previously
attached to anti-Castro movements and alleged to be
of operational value to CIA.
Source
Andres Romero, known by Espines to have
participated in CIA directed operations in Africa.
was directed to specifically contact Rosorg for any informa-
tion of value portaining to CIA activity when in the Miani
arca.
Caridad Gonzalez Machin, involved with
exfiltration runs from Cuba.
✓
Heriberto Delgado, a cousin of source who
lives in Venezuela, & brother of Adolfo Delgado who was
killed in 1957 during an assault on the Estista Palace
(in Cuba. He is thought by the source to be a communist.
L
Source furnished little information regarding
the above individuals and used as an excuse that although
he was on close terms with most of them, he has had little
or no contact with then since leaving the Miami area.
Of all the individuals named by Espinosa, he
appeared most concerned in obtaining any information on
Dr. Cesar Baro and Dr. Fernando Cabezad. Both individuals
had been associates of the source in Havana and Cabezas
had worked with the source in Havana. He advised Espinosa
that although both are known to be anti-Castro, he did not
feel either had any connection with CIA.
4
SECRET

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
ZŁAZARO KODY ESPINOSA BONET
MAIA
SECRET
During the ensuing conversation which lasted
from 10:30 AM until 7:30 PM, the source counted three
or four reels of tape utilized by Espinosa and each reel
would record for about one hour, or approximately thirty
minutes on each side. (Espinosa) whose true identity had
not been revealed to the source, requested him to call
him "Esteban," Referring to a report prepared by source
and left at a drop site in Union City, New Jersey, on
May 18, 1969, Espinosa stated that the report had been
poorly prepared and lacked necessary detail. He directed
the source to be more specific and thorough in answering
any questions for future reports.
☑
Espinosa proceeded to review with the source
the information furnished by source in the previous report.
Espinosa was quick to cite any small discrepancy between
the information contained in the report and that which was
furnished by the source during their conversation.
Espinosa queried the source in connection with
individuals in Miami with whom the source had been familiar.
The questions concerning these individuals included their
current addresses, general background and sympathies,
activity in Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operations,
etc.
Espinosa displayed a photograph of (First Name
Unknown) Mellado and asked source if he recognized him.
Mellado was described as male, of Caucasian race, who
appeared to be Cuban, 32-35 years old, husky build, dark
hair and dark eyes. The source could not recognize the
individual photographed.
Espinosa made several inquiries about "Frank",
a non-existent individual who the source intentionally
included in his prior report as a principal agent for CIA.
The source advised Espinosa that he met "Frank" on only
two or three occasions and knew nothing more specifically
about him.
While the source was answering a question
concerning an individual named "Piche", Espinosa inadvertently
referred to "Piche" as Epifanio Romero, which the source
knew as the true name of "Piche. | Romero is known by
Espinosa to have been previously connected with CIA
Source
of Cuta-20
SECRET
2

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
LAZARO EDDY ESPINOSA BONET
SECRET
On at least three occasions, spiness asked
the source about the degree of fluency of the latter's
spoken and written English and asked if he is able to
relate with Aloricano. He was seemingly impressed when
the source andvered affirmatively and cxplained that he
had attended night school in the New Jorsoy area.
Espinosa queried the source about semo
infiltration runs into Cuba that the source had led.
Espino nentioned specific runs in which the source
participated which had not been mentioned previously
by the source. He seemed to be very well prepared and
gave the impression that he know the answers to all the
questions directed at the source. Ho was interested in
any problems that the source's team might have experienced
when entering and leaving Cuba during CIA operations.
He inquired about the control methods of CIA
infiltration teams, whether members of the teams wore
over curveilled in the United States, the chain of command
for a team, and to when team leaders report. The source
answered that each norber was responsible only to himself.
(Concerning security rules on the other vessel during.
infiltration and exfiltration operations, the source stated
that each team leader was responsible for the performance
of his tean and each team member was held responsible for
each piece of equipment issued to him.
Source was requested to identify any mother
vessel, the bases from which they operate, and the crew
members. The source stated he could not answer these
questions due to the length of time passed since the source
vas connected with CIA operations in liami.
The source was further questioned regarding the
notheds of infiltration into Cuba, the role of the mother
vessel, intermediary vessels, landing crafts, and the
establishment of intelligence nets inside Cuba. Apparently
noting that the source was not furnishing full details of
the question, Espinosa interrupted and requested the
source to verify Espinosas explanation. Espinosa proceeded
to relate concisely the plans and methods utilized in CIA
operations.
5
SECRET
:
'

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
LAZARO EDDY ESPIROSA BONET
SECRET
Asked how teams were able to build sheds
and living quarters in the mangrove Champs inside of
Cuba without being noticed by natives in the same area,
the source replied that everyone in the vicinity of the
infiltration points vere sympathetic to the teams. The
source explained that one person in charge of an observation
post approximately one mile away from one infiltration
point cooperated with the teaus and was later taken out
of Cuba by the source
Espinosa asked if there are still any collaborators
or persons sympathetic to the United States Government on
the Cuban const with whom the infiltrators worked. Source
replied that to his knowledge all those who were of
assistance have been either jailed or killed.
Espinosa was also concerned about the
employment of CIA personnel in the Keys off of Florida
and asked the source as to why CIA would maintain personnel
in that area. Source stated he did not know unless it
was to guard against infiltration by Cuban fishing vessels.
Questioned again about his reasons for
cooperating with the CHUN, the source replied that he is
an individual completely independent of any political
belief. He said that he was initially motivated against
the regime of Fidel Castro because he had seen his parents
work hard and save for 40 years in order to afford a few
luxuries in their later lives, only to see the Cuban
Government intervene and claim possession of everything,
including their home. He further explained that it
appears the United States will never force Castro out of
Cuba but that the fact remains he is Cuban and Cuba is
his fatherland. He said he is willing to cooperate only
to the extent that his parents will receive fair treatment
from the Cuban Government.
Espinosa had information that the source was
suspected at one time by Cubans in Miami of possibly
being connected with the Cuban G-2, which information
caused a United States Government investigation. Source
replied that this was probably due to his number of
successful runs into Cuba without incident which prompted
others to suspect he had to have connections with G-2,
6
SECRET

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
LAZARO EPY ESPINOSA BORET
11
SECRET
On one run, the roENCE WAS out of contact with CIA for
ten days which added further to the possibility that he
had either defected or was working with G-2. Host of the
rumors vere quelled however when he submitted to a CIA
lie detector test which resulted negatively. He credited
his ability to avoid ambushes and misfortune to the experience
he had in infiltration exercises as well as extensive
CIA training.
Approximately one half hour of the meeting
between the source and Espinosa entailed ascertaining the
proficiencies of the source in the training of demolitions
radio operation, weaponry, seamanship, etc., which he
received from CIA. Nothing was mentioned concerning any
intentions by CHUN to utilize the source in connection
with any of his previously mentioned fields of training.
The source informed Espinosa that he had been
contacted since their last meeting by Jose Ramon Egues,
who is currently reorganizing the Vanguardia Revolucionaria
Cubana, an anti-Castro organization. The source has been
designated by Egues to lead the military faction of the
organization. It was explained to Espinosa that Egues has
goals of ultimately bombing the CMUN at New York City by
means as yet not disclosed to the source. The source was
instructed that in the future he is to spend as much time
as possible with Egues in determining that organization's
plans of action against the CMUN and Government of Cuba.
At different times throughout the meeting,
Espinosa was observed to lean back on the ground which
exposed a weapon tucked inside his trousers at the waist,
which was described by the source to be a black Waltham
9MN Automatic Pistol.
At a point of about two hours through the
interview, Espinosa took the source on foot to the Allerton
Luncheonetto at 649 Allerton Avenue, where each bought
a fountain drink. While the source sat at the bar,
Espinosa went into one of the two telephone booths located
nearest the rear wall of the luncheonette. He was in the
booth about 30 seconds but did not make a call. He did
not indicate his reason for entering the booth. Finishing
their drink, they returned to a shady area in the same section
7
SECRET

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
LAZARO HRY ESPINOSA BONET
SECHET
The source suggested that the next meeting
take place in Carlstadt, New Jersey, to which suggestion
Espinosa replied he does not like to schedule meetings
in New Jersey unless absolutely necessary.
This document contains neither recommendations
nor conclusions of the FBI. It is the property of the FBI
and is loaned to your agency: it and its contents are
not to be distributed outside your agency.
9*
SECRET

--- Image 104-10062-10062_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
LAZARO HEY ESPINOSA HOUST
W
SECRET
of the park and continued their discussion, At this
point the source noted for the first táng & person of
Cuban appone sitting on a nearby park bench who
ronnined in the area through the entire recting. Tho
sowiec suspicted thin pace as being connected with
counter LvEveillance of the rooting.
Espinosa instructed the source to prepare in
report for the ame to the second portion of the
list of questions furnished to the latter on May 13, 1969.
The answera iu report icum are to be placed in tn olipty
cigarette package and dropped at 11:00 All on August 20,
1969, or August 22, 1060, bohind an iron gate fence at
the northwest correr of Bronx Park East at Allerton Avenue,
from two to five fcot north of the concrete stone pillar
which anchors the fence. The source is to return to the
drop site at 1:00 Hi to check if the drop was covered.
Two dates for the pickup were provided in the event there
were too rany porsong in that area to rich covering the
drop.
Espinera asked the source if he would be
agrecable to go to Hami for a nouth in an effort to
contact friends and ex-associates of CIA. The source
stated he was not, in view of his family and employment
obligations, but agreed to go for a short period, possibly
three or four days. Espincca told him that while in
Miani, the source's mission would consist of determining
current activities of the CIA, identities of any new CIA
teams, identities of Goverment vessels currently in or
out of service, new principal agents, CIA instructors,
and any CIA activities including the deployment of Cubans
to South American regions for CIA operations.
The date agreed upon on which source will go
to Miami is August 25, 1909, but the source will indicate
to Espinoza in the report to be left at the next drop that
he will delay his departure until Saturday morning,
August 30, 1969, in order to pick up his next pay check,
and will not return until Tuesday morning, Soptember 2, 1969.
The source vas instructed by Espinosa to meet in following
his return to New Jersey at 11:00 All on September 17 or
September 20, 1000, at the intersection of Gun Hill Road and
White Plains Road, New York, at which tins results of the
Miani mission will be disclosed,
8
SECRET