

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_1.jpeg ---
104-10182-10004
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
14-00000
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME:
WIROGUE
201-233472
VOL. IT
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY:
DATE
RECEIVED
DATE
RETURNED
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME)
SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIAL
27 JUY 78
DAN HARDWAY
Dan H
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE
201-23347

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_100.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEORET
with
These agents work well together and it is my personal fealing that
roper considerations or call it agent handling", they will
lish their assigned mission.
do reca
once the type of Maps and Compasses are decided
upon for ope: usage , that the agents be given more work in Maps and
they do need practical work now in the use
Compass
amy rate
Nap and Compa
Orig. & 1 Chief, SR/DOB
-
c.c. 1 - SR/DOR/COP
1 - Project AUSENTINEL C.O.
BILLY JACK JOHNSON

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_102.jpeg ---
14-00000
PUR...
egy madár. \ SHIA TRENDS
1-
3. From 1935 to 1936 Subject attended the school of Arts and Metiers"
t Chalons-sur-Marne for approximately one and one-half years. He was ex
pelled from this school because of a childish prank. Subject and several of
his frionds had gone into a forbidden arca in the attic where they were ex-
ploring. The bead of the school board a noise and went to Investigate.
Subject jumped out of a viniow into the courtyard and was caught by the
Director This was the last of a long series of infractions of the school
of
discipline, and the Director of the school, wanting to make an example
Subject, requested that his (Subjects) arents take Bubject out of the
school. This was a technical school, leading to a degree in engineering.
The next school that Subject attended was Ecole Breguet, which
led to a degree in electrical engineering, located on Rue Pasteur in Paris.
Subject lasted here for a period of six months, and was expelled because he
had made a photograph of a nude woman and was caught showing it around the
school.
From
rom 1937 to 1938, a per od of approximately 14 months, Subject
attended the Ecole Cinematographique The course here lasted for only two
the way.
Subject stated that he was
years, and Subject almost made it all
good student in those courses in which he was interested, but he would
never submit to discipline or authority from individuals for whom he had
no respect and no liking. This ended Subject's formal education.
'
16. When Subject was in his teens he got into difficulty with the
French Police on several occasions. When he was approximately 15 years.
of age,
routing: Ject and his mother had gone to a hotel in Paris, and during a
check of identity papers it was established that subject's identity
card had lapsed, and he was taken to the police precinct in order to ex-
plain the circumstances. Subject was accompanied by his mother, who prom-
ised to the police that this would be attended to immediately.
7. When Subject was approximately 16 years of age, he stole a dic-
tionary from a book store. He was apprehended by the clerk who called the
police, and Subject was taken to the local precinct. A call was made to
Subject's mother, and Subject was released in his mother's custody. No
restitution was necessary, since the book had been taken back by the clerk.
8. When Subject was 17 years of age, he and a group of his friends
had gone to Pobinson in order to go horseback riding. They were late in
returning the horses and started galloping in the streets of Robinson in
order to get back to the riding stable. The local gendarme stopped them
"and charged them with some infraction having to do with disturbance of the
peace. Subject stated that three years later, he returned and paid a 900
franc fine.
9. When Subject was 19 years of age, he spent 12 days in jail in
Paris. This was due to an infraction of the French registration ordi-
nances for foreigners, during the days prior to the start of World War II.
2.
:
:
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_101.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
Chief, BR Division
ATTH
George FILL
FROM
Interrogation Research Division
SUBJECT: S.F
174803
Date: 18 May 1959
TRD: 36915
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Subject of this report is a forty year-old divorced stateless
resident of France. ubject was born in Russia and has been re
He has never received his French
siding in France since childhood.
citizenship.
2. Om 13 March 1959 Mr. George FILL, Deputy Chief BR/DOB, requested
On
that Subject be polygraphically examined as soon as he (Subject) could be
made available in a safe house in Paris, France. Mr. FILL stated that
Subject was being considered for use in a sensitive position and, in view
of Bubject's complicated life history, it was felt necessary to check out
certain portions on the polygraph. The primary interest was to polygraph-
ically determine whether the events in Subject's life history, from ap-
prodmately 1940 on, had actually occurred; whether Subject was fabricating
in order to deliberately deceive the Americans because he was an opposition
agent, or whether he was exaggerating in order to make himself appear more
suitable.
3. On 23, 24, and 25 March 1959 Subject was interviewed and poly-
graphically examined in the French language, on the premises of a safe
house in Paris, France. Subject was very cooperative throughout the in-
terviews and readily submitted to polygraph examination.
Kthe
1
DETAILS OF THE REPORT
1. Subject stated that he was born on 12 July 1918 in Gori near the
town of Tiflis in Georgia. Subject has two siblings, a sister, Helen, born
Subject's
on 1 May 1915, and a brother, Achille, born on 17 July 1916.
father was a putroleum engineer and was rather well-to-do, but following
the Bolshevik Revolution and the assimilation of the short-lived Republic
Into the Soviet Union, Subject and his family fled and settled in France
in the early 1920's.
2. Subject's early years were spent in Paris where he attended various
schools without graduating from any of them. Subject ascribes this to his
inability to accept the prescribed dull instruction and the everyday boredom
of learning things in which he was not interested. Subject also stated that
he was rather wild and undisciplined in those days, and liked to do as ho
pleased.
H1233477
i
$

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
Soc Paulo le 29 fevereiro
1960
Ma Cocotte cherie.
Voici la deuxième lettre que je t'écris.D'ailleur
Convoye des lettres,ma.
nBest pas coulement à toi que j'al
aux
1 à mon frere, au toubib et mon ex-belle aoeur, et ausi
ussi
genssches qui 'tals avant de vous quitter voici un an passe
J'aval 6crit d'ici des
11
que j'avais pu le faire, c'est à dire
de colà trois mois en
mois environ Je
réponse à 1'adresse que j'avais donnée
'ai jamais reçu aucune
j'aurais plus de chance car il doit y avoir cert
espère que cott te-fois
raison quelque-part Comm
voir certainement une
avion qui portait m
est la mode ces temps-çi, ou blon
10
bien celui qui rapportait lo
est ecras quolque-part, ou
alors Ce qui serait plus près
it la B
vérité,il n'y a jamais
reponse pour une raison qui
jui m'échappe. Il est possible
souvent on deplacement dans
placement dans le pays ou mo
courrier
mome
t envolé en fun
Jivaros
utre
commo
dehor
ment
temps
130ccasion do
es
repone
a
chose,ou
ussi
vous racontais un tas do chosos-interessantes de
du feu de
TOUS
pays que
Commo n'aime pas repoter
vous ne saures rien dutout si je
lettre aussi
tor, ayant été un peu partout,
les mêmes choses plusieurs fois,
n'ai pas de reponse à cette
Je suis revenu seulement hier d'une promenade de dous
mois dans le nord du pays. C'est plein de serpents et de Sesilier
Parmis les bresiliennes 11
moins chouettes aussi.Il faut
vraiment chouettes ot de
aussi.Il faut y gouter pour comprendre.Jo parle
évidemment des brezilienne» des grandos
on quitte la ville,
la villo,ça fait plutôt Vesinet ea on aurait tendance
villes,parooque quand
vouloir ae payer une bouteille d'Airwick que d'y mettre le nos
Il a fait un peu chaud nas to o'est l'ôté pour
cet hemisphère, et quand il pleut c'est de la vapeur qui vous
descend sur le dos,mais avec un bon ventilateur, une douche froide.
et dos boissons glacées,on arrive à ne pas fondre completement.
Je n'ai rien à faire en France, mais tu sale bion as Cocott
que je pense toujours à vous, ou que je me trouve, aussi mon idée
est-elle de faire un saut pour vous vår,méno no serait-ce qun
instant,dea que cela me sera possible.
ma
st-il passe ches vous depuis mon depart.Annik
dû retrouver Titi,madame Bebert Monestier a certainement demena
geo. Nelly se met-elle toujours les doigts dans le nes? Membe
ronchonne t'elle toujours. Et tol que fais-tu? Jaai oublié lo
nom du chien noir..ah oui, Opi le pisseur.
....
Eg bien voilà, maintenant nous allons parler serieusement
penso que cotto lettre va t'apportor de bonnes nouvelles,mais
Je ne le ferais que si je suis certain d'avoir une reponse.Quand
je l'aurai je t'enverral de l'argent d'abord pour te depanner et
on suite parooque je vous aime, toi et les tiens. Dès que locontact
sera retabli jo vous feral parvenir ou te feral parvenir tous
les mois de quoi vous aider substantiellement et peut-stre plus.
So que
que je te demande on echange c'est:
d'envoyer aux personnes que j'ai cftdes plus haut, juste
un petit mot pour donner mon nom et ma nouvelle adresse exacte-
ment comme celle-ci.Ni plus ni moins
20) de demander
de demander
Annick, Hina et à Nelly de m'ecrire ai
elle le veulent bien, cette lettre etant aussi pour chacune d'elles
et alles doivent certainement savoir combien cela ne ferait plai-
air.
Entre temps les jours passeront et je viendral vous voir,
probablement on novembre ou on decembre.el jo ne se cabe pas
la gueule on "route, les pierres sont un peu pointues sur le cne-
min on jo auis.Alors je vous bragaral beavami,beanaoup,tol
Name Anniak, Hina. staatio Nelly.
Kamše,

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_103.jpeg ---
14-00000
__
1
SUCRET
The French had instituted a special means of control for the non-French
citizens residing in France, and Subject had neglected to get the proper
documents Subject stated that these were the only brushes with the French
Police that he had while he was a youth.
10. Regarding his Army career, Subject stated that in 1939 he volun-
teered for service in the French Foreign Legion. Be stated that he had
registered, with his class, for Army service but had never received
notice to report, and this was the reason for his volunteering in
Legion. Subject went with his group to Tunisi vbere he was assigned
the cavalry
11. At this time there was an attempt made on the part of the Franch
to form ethnic companies, and the Georgians, under the comand of Captain
ODICHEL DYZIL (MR-IRD) (now a retired Major living in LeVesinet near Paris),
Cormed into an infantry company consisting of about 120 men and were stationed
near the town of Montpelier, France. Bubject attained the rank of Corporal
This company saw no action, and in June 1941 Subject vas separated from
Legion, which was then considered as part of the French Army.
69 13.
12.
2. Subject went through part of his demobilization procedure in Lyons,
France, where he was issued 800 francs and given a travel order to proceed
home to Paris. When Subject arrived in Paris, he was required to go to the
gendarmerie on Boulevard Exelams, which was the demobilization center for
L
the Paris area, where he was issued an additional 200 france and ally
taken off the rolls of the French Army.
h Army. Subject stated that this was the
time of completo disorganization in France, due to the recent defeat by
the Germans, and the beginning of the occupation.
13. The French Army official, with whom Subject spoke regarding the
possibility of obtaining employment, advised Subject to go to the French
Military Intelligence. Subject stated that he obtained the address, which
ho could not, recall at this time, and attempted to get in touch with the
proper individual. Subject was unsuccessful and was given the "run around.
Failing this, Subject returned home and lived at the family residence at
#28 Rue Cabanis (this number has now been changed to #36). Subject attempted
to lock for employment, but he was unable to find any type of work.
1
14. Through some friends, Subject discovered that the Germans vere
hiring people for employment in Germany. Subject went to the German Arbeits
Ant on the uni d'Orsay and made application for work in Germany. He
stated that he was an electrician, and he was told that he would be sent
to Poelitz-Stettin to work in a factory, where he would be receiving one
mark per hour (which was then equivalent to 20 francs). Subject signed a
contract for a period of one year, and he received a travel order to proceed
to his destination.
15. Subject stated that within a few days he and a number of other
volunteers were loaded aboard a special train and proceeded into Germany.
:
3

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_104.jpeg ---
14-00000
5
The proposition looked good to Subject at the beginning, but soon be found
that there were xerous buns and tileves who also applied as volunteers
ect finally arrived and was assigned to work as an electrician
factory which was engaged in the afacture
caced in the racufacture of synthetic gasoline. Bus
jert was louged in a camp together with a gram of other voluntary workers
16.
After approximately three months Subject became restless and dis-
satisfied, and wanted to change employment Be applied, and got permission,
for a veek end pass to Stettin, which was approximately 20 to 25 kilometers
from where Subject was working Ia Stettin Subject net a Georgian by
nickname "Chou Chou (Subject stated that Gulvy CALDASTAMI (NR-IRD) told
hia (Subject) that Chou Chou is prese tly in he United States). Subject
stated that Chou Chou vas in a German form with some special insignia.
Chou Chou invited Subject to visit him (Chou Chou) and several other
Georgians, who were being rained by the Gerancs for special work, apparently
as saboteurs, against the Scviets. Subject vest to visit Chou-Chou, met
approximately 15 Georgians, and an attempt was made to interest Subject in
this organization. However, nothing ever c of this
17. Subject advised that he was getting more dissatisfied working in
the factory, and a few weeks following his original visit to Stettin Sub-
Ject asked for, and got, a pass to go to Berlin, in order to see an imagi-
nary uncle. Subject received an authorisation which entitled him to stay
away for a period of ten days, which made it until 2 June 1942. The docu-
Dents that Subject had in his possession at this time were as follows:
a pink paper which identified Subject as a Georgian living in a factory
lager, and which be obtained approximately ten days after his arrival at
the factory; the second document was a work card which was issued to all
the workers in the factory and served as an identity card.
intention was to return to France, and he extended the date on the travel
Subject's
paper to 12 June 1942, which gave him sufficient time to accomplish his
journey.
-
18. with this travel document Subject had no difficulty and arrived
in Berlin. In Berlin Subject took the train to Aachen, where he met
several other individuals who intended to cross the frontier and return
to France. Subject made inquiries as to how to proceed into France, and
be was told to go and see the Gestapo to obtain authorization to cross
the frontier and was told to return to Berlin. Instead, Subject decided
to proceed; on foot, toward the Belgian border, and this time Subject did
not consult the German authorities.
19. Subject proceeded to the Eupen, Malmedy area and inquired from
door to door about someone who could help him across the German frontier.
Subject finally found an individual who promised, for the sum of 40 marks,
to lead him (Subject) across the German-Belgian frontier, during the night.
They croase: the frontier without any difficulty, and Subject proceeded on
to Verviers, Belgium, where he took the train to either Liege or Charleroi.
Subject made inquiries as to where he could change his German marks into

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_108.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
Subject got in touch with an engraver in Paris, who engraved the proper
plates from vřich Subject could reproduce, at will, the proper stamp for
the proper document. The paper itself was not a critical item, since the
various German ministries usually used any available paper. Occasionally
and in that case, Subject reproduced the watermarks
by first photographing the document, washing the watermark, which usually
consisted of vavy lines, from the negative, then Subject would make another
negative and vush off everything but the watermark. Subject went so far
as to actually engage in substituting photographs on passports.
Gre was a ictermark
31 Subject stated that he would buy passports, which were passports
and
of foreigners working in Germstitute pages where necessary
a little wax cry mild diluted:
and the photographs were handled in the followin manner. Subject stated
that the photographs in these passports were attached by means of notal
clasps to the passport page and, therefore, could not be very well removed.
Subject would, 1 stead, remove the gelatia from the photograpa very care
acid, such as acetic acid, first putting
fully by using
on to the clasps so that they would not be eroded by the acid
and placing blotter paper under the photograph. This acid solution would
dissolve the gelatin emulsion, anil Subject would remove it from the photo-
graphic paper. Next, he would take the photograph of the new owner of the
ho
passport aul, by using steam or warm water, he would soften the emulsion
and then carefully lifting it off the paper, using tweezers and little
sticks of wood, Subject would transpose the emulsion into the photographic
paper of the passport. Subject stated that this was an extremely delicate
operation, and required long and careful practice on his part.
32. During the above procedure the photograph was alightly distorted,
and occasionally the emulsion would absorb too much water and would over-
flow the bounds of the original photograph. In that case, Subject would
trin the edges to fit properly. Subject stated that one corner of the
photograph would usually be stamped by the validating office, and if the
catchet was in ink, the ink would remain on the paper when Subject lifted off
the old emulsion. This ink would show through the new emulsion, and on
cursory examination it would be impossible to distinguish whether the ink
was over the coilsion or rider the emulsion. If the catchet were of the
impression type, there would be no problem whatsoever since it would show
through the new emulsion very readily.
33. Subject stated that he obtained for himself a Rumanian diplomatic
passport which he bought, through a girl friend, from a Rimanian at the
Rumanian Embassy in Berlin. 3.bject bought this passport for 1000 marks,
and he used it only while he was traveling in Berlin. In effect, Subject
assured an entirely new identity whenever he stepped into his car since
the registration and driver's license were all made out to conform with the
name on the passport. Since 3 bjuct's car was registered in the name of
an employee of a foreign embassy, Subject was entitled, as a diplomat,
to a larger cas ration.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
Eduardo
AUC
Caixa rental 11724 (Lepa)
Sac Peulo
Erssil
2

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_106.jpeg ---
14-000ww
glance at the pass, put in the official validating Arbeits Ant cachet. With
document, Subject proceeded to the Berlin Presidium (Police Head-
quarters) where, on the basis of this document, Subct vas able to obtain
a foreigie's 88sport Subject advise that Yas successful in this.
endeavor only because the various Geman departments had very little Maison
with each other, and there appeared to be no central card index øystan
vhereby individuals could be cross checked Another reason that Subject
advanced as an explanation for his success was that, according to Subject,
German clerks were extremely conscious and respectful of any official
Looking cachet, and could not conceive that anyone would have the effrontery
of counterfelting an official document. Subject explained that the infor
ation he had filled in the passport stated that he was allowed to proceed
to France
ce in order to visit his parents. Subject described the fore
foreimer's
passport as a regular booklet with a grayish co
the same procedure was
utilized in order to obtain a passport for Pascal
Sometime during the spring of 1943, Subject and Pascal returned
Paris, and both decided that there was no point in remaining in France under
the German occupation, and they made plans to to Brazil. They took the
train and proceeded to the Spanish border, arriving in the town of Hendaye.
They crossed into Spain through a nouïtain trail, and attempted to exchange
their French francs into Spanish pesetas. They were unsuccessful, were
looked upon very suspiciously, remained for one day and decided to return
to France, where the German Grenz Polizei, which Subject believes were non-
bars of the Wehrmacht, arrested Subject and Pascal and kept then under
guard for a period of approximately four days. During this time, they were
wildly interrogated, and a check was made to see whether they were wanted
by the German Palice. After four days, they were released and taken under
guard to the Hendaye Railroad Station, and were told to buy tickets to
Paris, which they had indicated as their residence.
'
·
25. As soon as the German authorities left, Subject and Pascal ex-
changed their tickets for another destination, and got out at the town of
Pau. ✓ There they proceeded, on foot, to Holcon on the border of Vichy.
France. They crossed over and net two gendarme and told the gendarme
that they (Subject and Pascal) wanted to join the Foreign Legion. At the
gendarmerie, they were given an official travel order to proceed to
Toulouse. Upon arriving there they were told to proceed to harseilles.
In Marseilles, Subject and Pascal made a faux pas. They showed their
German passports, and the attitude of the French changed. Pascal indicated
to the French authorities that he would volunteer as a worker in Africa,
and Subject stated that he would retur. to Paris. Subject went to Lyons
where he had a friend, a far removed cousin by the name of Guign who was
later killed during an air raid. Subject's cousin attempted to help him
(Subject) but was unable to do so, and Subject took the train to the
Chalons-sur-Sonne, the border between occupied and unoccupied France.
ac
25. At the border, the guard misread Subject's name at Fritz WILI.
Subject played his role to the hilt, using his knowledge of the German
: 6
:
i
:
ANDY.
**CORTS

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_105.jpeg ---
14-00000
th
SECRET
French francs,
and the Belgians, thinking Subject to be an escaped prisoner
of vr, be
uc÷long er how to proceed, and Subject took
the train the French-Bellan frontier, arriving in the vicinity of
con-
Valenciennes. While still on the train, Subject had to go through a c
At this time he was
trol point in the forbidden zone near St. uentin.
helped by the conductor of the train and the postal clerk. Subject suc-
cessfully passed through this difficult point, concealed in a mail sack
At Valenciennes a check of the passengers vas made by a German control
officer who somehow seemed to overlook Subject's presence, and did not
ask Bubject any questions. From this point on Subject had no difficulty
and arrived in Paris and proceeded to his home
20. Subject's father inquired why Subject had returned to France
and upon learning that Subject had left his job vithout authorization
After three
vas very upset and talked Subject into returning to Germany
or four days at home Subject went to the German Arbeits Ant, made an ap
plication for work as an electrician, and requested that he be assigned
work in Berlin Subject stated that he was not asked any questions, ap-
parently no check was made, and he departed for Berlin, by teain.
21. Subject was employed in a factory in Berlin which was engaged in
making electrodes. Here Subject was employed as a photographer, but his
Job did not last very long, because Subject did not come to work on time
and was not very interested in his job, since it was a very monotonous,
An incident occurred in the factory which be-
repetitious sort of work.
There was a
came a pretext for Subject's transfer to another factory.
robbery in Subject's department, involving the theft of some platinum
crucibles. While Subject was never accused of it, he was asked questions
by the police officials who came to the factory to investigate the theft.
The factory manager used this incident as a pretext to have Subject trans-
ferred.
22. Subject was assigned to work as an electrician in another factory
in Berlin, which was engaged in the manufacture of belts for machine guns
mounted in aircraft. Subject stated that the production work was very
antiquated, and numerous women were engaged in inspecting belts for the
proper size, by using a hand gauge. Subject built a jig which greatly
speeded up the inspection work, and the management of the factory decided
that Subject was a great German patriot..
23. In Berlin, Subject met a Frenchman by the name of Pascal, who was
also employed as a French voluntary worker. Pascal told Subject that he
(Pascal) wanted to return to France.
and they decided to try to get back Ject was also tired of his job,
to Paris. They went to the office of
the Arbeits Amt in Berlin and got blank leave passes. Subject filled in
the information on a typewriter, then with a burnt match and india ink
traced the outline of the cachet from a validated leave pass, and re-
turned to the Arbeits Ant office where he stood in line to have his pass
validated. When Subject's turn came, the busy clerk, with a cursory'
5
!

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_107.jpeg ---
14-00000
176
be Armistice Comission.
language, and said that he vnd a representative of
Subject crossed the border, however, or the occupied side Subject was stoppe
by
German border guard. Bubject showed the guard his (Subject's) pass-
port and vas told that it was not sufficient, that be needed a travel order.
Subject decided to bluff and aaked to be taken to the beadquarters of the
der guards, where he naged to convince the official that be (Subject)
Subject told
was really going back to Berlin in order to resume his
this official teat he (Subject) had been to visit his brother in Marseilles,
and that the French were not cooperative and had refuses to issue him a
pass to return to Berlin. The official of the border card which may have
possibly, according to Subject, have been the Ges
Gestapo, ureta Subject out
pass indicating that Subject was returning to his work i- B rk.
27 This enabled Subject to proceed through the cartol point, but,
instead of returning to Berlin Subject proceeded back to Paris.
11
ere Sub-
ject remained for several months without doing any kind
without doing any kind of work. During
this time while in a bar Subject vas talking to the id, who told
Subject
Subject about her brother who was a prisoner of var in Germany
told
that it wasn't very difficult to get out, and said that be would try
and see whether he could do it himself Subject asked her for a photograph
or her brother, and he had the intention of using it as a passport. How
evar, all this came to nothing because Subject was not properly equipped
at this time
28. It was at this time, in late 1943, that Subject saw how easy it
was to go back and forth between Germany and occupied France. Since be
had a passport Subject was not stopped between the two countries, and in
order to insure free travel he made himself a permanent travel order.
This be obtained through Georgian friends, who vare working in various
German ministries. Subject's knowledge of photography was very helpful.
29. Subject's friends, noticing that he seemed to go back and forth
t will, began to charge him with small comissions. He would take coffee
and various other foodstuffs, which were scarce in Germany but easily ob-
tained from Spain, through devious channels. Subject would either deliver
or sell the products to certain individuals in Germany, sand would keep a
certain percentage of the money for himself. Subject quickly became aware
Bub-
that he could make more money if he could obtain the items imself.
ject made contacts with various individuals who were engaged in making
trips back and forth from Paris to the Spanish border. They would bring
Socia
back coffee, tea, American dollars, and various other scarce items.
German soldiers were unwitting members of Subject's blackmarket operations.
30. In
In order to do this work successfully, Subject had to become ac
quainted with the various passos and travel orders issued by various German
departments. Subject set up a laboratory, complete with photographic en-
larging apparatus. He photograplied and enlarged visas in order to be able
to reproduce the exact outlines and lettering in the visa. Then he would
reduce them to the proper size and transfer them on to the proper documents.
7
:
1
I

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_110.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
39.
a French-
Another person who Subject not in Berlin was named LUCAS,
man ɩ bo vas employed
vas employed in a radio shop in Berlin.
radio shop in Berlins LUCAS became an associate
of Subject and helped Subject by stealing various sparu parte, for
purpose of setting up the radio station. LUCAS was also instrumental in
sing about Subject's downfall. LUCAS had met a young lady in Berlin.
1
3144
She vas a Belgian national and said that he had a fiance in Paris whom
he had not seen for some time. She asked for help in going to Paris,
and Subject was neet her in the Cafe Truf in Berlin. Bubject eventually
her and told her that he (Subject) would make her some fals documents
to enable her to get to Paris. A meeting was arranged for the next day,
which time she was to bring a passport and a photograph and transmit to Sub-
Ject She did not show up at the appointed hour and place. Subject waited
for a short time and then went to the railroad station, accompanied by his
girlfriend, Astree SCHEIDT (MR-LRD), and his partner in blacmarket acti
ities KATZ The platform was empty, except for the girl Subject was to
meet
Bubject addressed her and asked her why she had not kept the appoint
ment and she replied, "You are going to be arrested. At this moment the
German Police converged on the platform where Bbject, SCHMIDT, and KATZ
were standing, and arrested them.
40. Subject stated that on this day he was leaving on a trip to Paris
and had brought along four suitcases containing radio parts, pistols, am-
munition, inks, printing equipment, cancrus, and various paraphernalia
necessary for the manufacture of false documents. The police took Subject
back to his hotel and searched the apartment, where they found more equip-
ment and photographed everything. After that, Subject uns taken to the
police station, where he was separated from his friends. The arrest oc-
curred on either 21 or 22 February 19th at approximately 1127. Subject.
recalls the time, because the only day train to Paris left at about that
hour.
J.
41. Subject stated that the previous evening he had suffered an ac-
cident on his hand. He had found a small phosphorous bomb and was un-
screwing the detonator, when it blew up and cut off several of Subject's
fingers At the police station, Bubject was treated, medically. Subject
was interrogated for a period of approximately eight months. In the
beginning, he was interrogated every day, and he admitted to the following
crimes: Subject stated that he did engage in making false documents and
that he was endangering the security of the German Reich, and was charged
by the police with espionage and of conducting intelligence with the
encry. Subject did not specifically admit to these two charges, but kept
up the police interest in his case by evasive answers. Subject was condemned
to death, but before the sentence could be carried out Subject was liberated
by the entry of the American Any, on 12 April 1945.
42. Subject had been an inmate of the German prisons in Tegel, Plotzen
See, Hanover, and Wolfenbutten. Bubject stated that he believes the plans
for his execution were delayed because of a scheme that he devised to in-
terest the authorities in hin. Subject stated that he advised the Germans
that he was the inventor of a motor which could be run on hydrogen.
10

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_109.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
31
Subject continued his blackmarket activities until approximately
February 19 whe
when, through an oversight, Bubjuct
an oversight, Bubjuct was arrested by
German Folice. Prior to his arrest, Sbject lived extremely well and
cupied a good apartment in Berlin S5ject's family thought that to
ccupied a high place in the Ministry, became Subject was in possession
of large sums of money, and also app
cey, and also appeared to navo no difficulty traveling
anywhere Subject stated that he even obtained a pass for his father,
who tal visit Mrich. bjoct stated that his father, at the time
to
devisoi
God a system for extracting oil from shale, and 8 bject, wanting
help his father with his (father's) knowledge, used a strata, co whurchy
he (Subject) gave 100,000 marks to his mother to invest into his fathe
fim
35. Subject stated that he helped ten Pranch vorkers and four, prisoners
war to return to France This care about as a result of requests that
ne to Subject from friends and not as an organized plan to help any
dividuals escape from Germany The only individual,
var whose name Subject could remember was a Franciran by the name
VILLEMADI (FR-IRD) VIAMAI, even though a prisoner of war, worked
farm during the vaak and could go into town on Sun laya The others
Sundays. The
names of
wham Bub ect belpud were deporteu vorkers. Bubject recalled the
two of these, Benri JOIETY (IR-ID) and Charles ALLAUMES (ME-IRD). Sub-
Ject stated that he provided each of these man with a passport, a travel
order, ration cards, and a small sum of money. Subject also instructed
each one on how best to conduct himself in order to avoid being apprehended
at the border.
36.
Subject also furnished an individual by the name of HEELSTEIN
with a travel order. NEGLISTED was a German Jev, who was engaged in black-
marketing operations. ELSTEIN had managed to conceal his Jewish back
ground and was in possession of a German passport, but feeling that the
Germans were about to arrest him, he provailed upon Subject to furnish him
with a falso travel order, which Bubject did.
37. Subject advised that he was successful in this work because each
German ministry issued its om travel ordure, and there was no means of
double chocking; first, the difficulty was too great to double check the
temporary duty travel orders; secondly, the unans were extrinaly re-
spectful of official looking documents; thirdly, because of the lov
mentality of personnel at check points; finally, because the passporta
were not counterfeit in all cases, and all Subject did was to substitute
a new photograph for the original. In return for the favor that Subject
extended to those poople, some of them reciprocated by helping him with
his blackmarket operations.
mir
39. Babject had a plan whereby he wanted to enlarge his blackmarket
operations, and had the intention of setting up a two-way radio system
to improve his commications. VILLEMAN, the French: prisoner of war
whom Subject helped, was an engineer, and Subject had intended to use
VILLIMAIN in sotting up the post in Paria. However, before Subject
could accomplish this be (Subject) was arrested by the German Police.
:
J
-

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_112.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
center.
Subject was interrogated by the French Security Officer, who
tablished Subject's true identity. Subject then stated, to the Securi
Officer, that he (Subject) had been deported to Germany as a forced laborer.
The Security Officer believed Bubject, and Subject received the 33,000 frane
avard which was mandatory for all repatriated forced laborers. This was in
early 1946. Subject quickly speat this money, and on the advice of the ex-
amining Security Officer, Subject got in touch with the "Service de Renseigne-
ments France on Boulevard Maunory in Paris. Subject tried to contact a
Colonel PASSY, who had been known during the War under the Non de Guerre,
Lieutenant Colonel FRANKLIN. Subject did not get to see PASSY but was told
to leave ant
asked to report on the Georgians in France. Subject refused this assign-
this vas his only contact with an intelligunce service.
t. 19 name with the secretary. Finally, Subject was contacted
47. Subject stated that be originally met Jean ADAM when they were
both children and again after the War. Subject was working for an architect
who had a decorating firm, and after his friendship with ADAM was resumed,
ADAM convinced Subject that it was easy to take money by committing rob-
beries, Subject at first refused to participate, but then agreed because
of his friendship for ADAM and because of the excitement. The first rob-
bery was comitted in carly 1949. Subject used a broken revolver, into
which he inserted wooden bullets which he had whittled. This robbery
was so successful and so interesting that the two partners decided to con-
mit another robbery of the same type. This is also successful, and they
attempted a third one. The targets for all of these robberies vere Jewelry
shops. The third robbery was unsuccessful, and Subject wanted to go back
to an honest life. Subject was, at this time, happily married, and was
afraid that his wife might find out about his activities. However, ADÆH
threatened that if Subject did not work with him on another robbery, he
(ADAM) would tell Subject's wife about the prior robberies. Sbject
agreed to participate in one more escapade, and in June 1950 they com-
mitted a successful robbery on the bank "Credit de 1' Quest" on the
Boulevard Hausmann in Paris. The proceeds of the robbery were split by
the two, and very shortly thereafter ADAM was apprehended by the French
Police because of his wild spending. Under interrogation, ADAM admitted
to the robberies and implicated Subject. Subject was apprehended by the
French folico, while he was on the French-Spanish border He was brought
back to Paris for trial, and was sentenced, on 5 January 1953, to seven-
years at hard labor. He was released on 19 December 1955 for good be-
havior . This is on record with the French Police and was not discussed
at length with Subject..
"
48. Subject stated that he has not heard from his father and sister
since their return to the Soviet Union, except for the following: Approxi-
nately two years ago, Subject's brother received a letter addressed to
The sons of Count
bearing the address of Subject's brother in
Gap, France. This letter was ostensibly from a woman whom neither Sub-
ject nor his brother knows and asked for news of them. It had a reply
envelope in it, and Subject does not know whether his brother ever
12
201-235477
:
:.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_114.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Other than DATO, have you ever used another name in order
hide your trus identitý
Subject stated that he also had a passport in the
name of a Rumanian, while he was enynged in blackmarket
activities in Germany The question was reworded to read,
Other than DATO and the name of a Rumanian, have you ever
used another new in order to hide your true identity?"
Subject answered, "Ho.
la your true name David
6.
Xes.
Here you a student at the Ecole des Arts and Metiers?
Yes.
Were you a student at the Ecole Cinematographique?
8.
Were you a student
student at the Ecole Breguet in Paris?
Yes
Yes.
10. Did you tell anyone that the Americans are in contact with
you?
H5.
11. Did you tell Annick the purpose of your visit to Paris?
No.
Subject stated that he had told her that he was
going to undergo some sort of an examination. She has
actually never asked Subject what the purpose of his
contacts with the Americans were, but she is aware
that the Americans are in contact with Subject for
some specific purpose, since she is the go-between.
12. Are the answers that you have given me truthful and exact?
Yes. _
14. Do you hate the Russians and the Soviets?
:
No.
:
17. Have you been refused French citizenship?
Yes.
Subject charts manifested no emotional disturbance
indicative of deception to any questions during tests
I and II.
i
TESTS III & IV
3. Did you enlist in the French Foreign Legion?
Yes.
4. Here you ever arrested or detained by any military police?
No.
14
f
1

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_113.jpeg ---
14-00000
answered the letter. Prior to this, in artery 1949, Sujees received
a letter from his father which was about 12 pages long, and which asked Sub-
ject to send his father technical looks on refrigeration. Subject stated
that he never replied to this letter. Subject had news of his sister
used to write occasionally to her friend, Madame Anette BABET (R-IRD), who
lived at #52 Boulevard St. Gerasin, Paris, France.
49. Subject also received news of his sister from a 2nd or 3rd cousin
by the name of Mathieu KERROSSALIDZE: (KR-TRD), who is about 52 years of age
and lives at #17 or 7 Avenue General DeGaulle, Leves net (Seine et Oise),
France Subject stated that Mathieu was a prisoner of war in Siberia and
bad probably been a member of the Bergan Battalion who had parachuted
into
USSR during the early days of the war. Mathieu returned to Paris-
approximately one and one-half years ago. His name had been in a Georgian
evapaper Mathieu vas arrested by the French and charged with collaborating
with
Germans He was interued by the French for a short time and
find
acquitted. At the present time Mathieu is in Germany attempting to
was not
work. His last known address is the one stated above. Subject
certain of the dates that Nathieu returned to France Subject saw Mathieu
in Paric, and during a conversation Mathieu stated that he had met Subject's
sister in Moscow, after his release from the Siberian prisoner of war camp.
At that time Mathieu was in Moscow in contact with the French Consulate,
Mathieu then
which issued him a paper stating that he was a French citizen.
got in touch with Subject's brother, who sent Mathieu sufficient funds to
return to France.
50. Subject stated that he has two distant cousins in the United States,
Guivy and Other ZALDASTANI. Subject stated that he recently saw Other, who
had come to France on a visit, and Subject asked other to tell duty that
everything is going well. Subject's maternal uncle, Djibo (Gabriel)
KANTCHOLI (MR-IRD), who is a taxi driver and lives at #37 Rue de la
Rochefoucauld, Paris IX, France, is well acquainted with the majority of
the Georgians who formerly resided in France but are now spread throughout
the world. Subject's father was a member of the Georgian nobility and, as
such, had a large circle of friends.
51. Subject stated that he would be very interested in obtaining a
permanent job with the Americans, which would give him a sense of accomplish-
ment and would satisfy his yearning for an exciting and unusual life.
SPECIFIC QUESTIONS
The following pertinent questions were asked of Subject:
TESTS I & II
1.
Is your namė David
2.
Were you born in July 1918:
13
?
Yes.
Yes.
I
TRY

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_115.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Are the events regarding your life history true?
6. Did you serve in the German Army?
7. Did you sarve in the S. D.
Ho.
Did you serve in any German military or para-mili
service whatsoever
Yea
Subject stated that he was employed for a short
riod of time as a chauffeur in the N3KK and occas
sionally, for a pariod of approdnately three months
served as an interpreter in Franch and German for
the Schuts Polizein
8a. Other than what you told me, have you served in any
German military or para-military service?
Ho
10. Were you a Gestapo agent?
11.
Yes.
Did you participate in blackmarket activities during 1943
and 1944 as you told mẹ?
Yes.
12. Were you engaged in any secret work for the German Police?
No..
13.
Are you deliberately hiding from me any of your activities
in Germany?
No.
Subject's charts manifested no emotional disturbance
indicative of deception to any questions during tests
III and IV.
TESTS V, VI, & VII
1. Are you deliberately hiding the truth regarding the letter
which you and your brother received from Russia? Ho.
2. Did your father return to the USSR because he believed in
Communian:
No.
3. Did you sister return to the USSR because she believed in
Communism
No.
4. Did your mother commit suicide because of disappointment in
you?
5.
lio.
Are you corresponding with your father and your sister in
the USSR?
No.
15

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_111.jpeg ---
14-00000
Subject stated that he told the Chief Warden in the prison of his (Subject's)
Invention, and the Warden told Suject to write a letter
..
cal Cemer
S
Subject believes
service which was in charge of this type of information.
that it was mown as Service Dienstelle 000. A representative arrived
and interviewed Subject asking Subject to furnish plans for this notor
Bubject stated that he had hidden part of the plans, and the investigation
be
Subject always managed to put them off slightly.
vent on
43. Subject stated that he made two attempts to escape while in the
custody of the German Police.
the German Police. The first time, Subject was under police in
terrogation in Berlin and during an air raid the prison in which Subject
being held vas destroyed, and Subject attempted to escapo but was caught
The second time, Subject was at the prison at Plotzen See and made a key
However te vas
out of a piece of vire and opened the door of his cell.
unsuccessful in this escape attempt also
127
Subject stated that his two friends, Othar and Gui vy-ZALDASTAHI
black-
(KR-IRD), who are now in the United States, know about Subject's
market activities and the circumstances leading to his arrest, and also
know about his subsequent prison term. Gaivy even participated in some
of Subject's blackmarket deals, and Other came to see Subject while he
was in the Plotzen Bee Prison
45. The reason for Subject's transfer from prison to prison was due
to the rapid Soviet advance, and luckily Subject found himself in an area
which was overrun by the American Arrry, in the middle of April 1945. After
liberation, Subject and the other prisoners were sent to a camp in the
vicinity of Kassel, from which they were to be repatriated to France.
However, living conditions were extremely difficult, and Subject and several
friends decided to go out on their own. They occupied a deserted villa on
the outskirts of Kassel. Subject brought in electric service by utilizing
wires. One day an
The
American Army cables and attaching them to the electric driver stopped
American Army truck passed over the wires and tore them. The
and apologized, and said that he would come back later and fix the vires.
In the afternoon, the driver of the truck returned with several companions
and they connected the electric wires to the house. The driver then asked
Subject whether to (driver) could bring his girlfriend to the house, and
Subject agreed. This went on for several days, and
on for several days, and finally the driver's
The driver then brought some
girlfriend remained to live at the house.
of his companions, who brought their girlfriends to live at the house.
Subject and his friends were supplied with American Army rations, and this
convenient arrangement continued for several months until Subject and his
friends decided to return to France.
46. Subject made his way to the repatriation center in Paris, which
was located in the Hotel Litetia on the Boulevard Raspail. At this time
Subject claimed to have lost all of his documents and vent under the name
of David DATO: He claimed to be a French citizen who had been a prisoner
of var in Germany. However, Subject was unable to carry this off, as he
was recognized by one of the Georgians, who worked in the repatriation
11
b

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_116.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
SECRET
9. Did Mathieu give you news of your sister in the UBER?
8. Do you think that Hathieu is a Soviet agent
Instructi
9. Did Mathieu give you secret instructions from Soviet
Intelligance!
Did Mathieu tell you that he met your sister in Hoscow?
Yes.
11. Did the Georgian Consul use blackmail to force you to work
for the Soviets:
1s
No.
Bubject's charte manifested no emotional disturbance
indicative of deception to any questions during tests
VI,
VII.
TESTS VII & E
5. Did you work as an electrician in Poelite:
Yes.
6. Did you obtain a travel order to go from Stettin to Berlin
as you explained to me?
Yes.
8. Are you doliberately hiding the truth about your trip from
Stettin to Berlin to Paris:
Ho.
Yes
10. Ware you employed as an electrician in the factory in Burlin?
Yes.
11. Were you forced to become a Gestapo agent?
12. Did you tell me the truth about tracing a cachet with a
burnt match?
Yes.
13. Did you tell me the truth about getting a passport?
Yes.
Bubject's charts maifested no emotional disturbance
indicative of deception to any questions during tests
VIII & IX.
TESTS X & XI
2. Did you charge the forced laborers for the counterfeit
documents?
Blo.
3. Did you help VILLEMAIN?
3a. Did you help ALLEAIMES?
Ycs.
Yes.
16
SACOST
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_117.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
4. Did you hálp JOIGNY
Yes.
ha. Did you help REELSTEIN:
Yes.
5. Did you help LUCAS?
Yes.
5a. Did you receive anything in return for your balp:
8. Did you go with Puscal from Berlin to the French border?
Yes.
11. Did the Gestapo furnish you with false identity pay
12.
Did you tell me the truth about substituting the photograph
0Q he passports:
Yes.
13. Did you exaggerate your life history in order
suitable in our eyes:
Ho.
14. Did you fabricate the stories you told me?
to appea
more
No.
Subject manifested emotional disturbance indicative
of deception to qucation 5a. He explained this reaction
by stating that he had never received any nonetary pay-
ment, however, it could be considered that he was reŢuld
to some extent, or that he expected to be repaid, through
favors in his blackmarket activities.
TSSTS XII & XII
193. Did you ever use another nario to conceal any activities for
a foreign intelligence service? Ho.
22.
Have you ever sold or given infomation to a foreign power?
Ito.
22a. Have you told anyone your connection with the American
Government:
No.
23. Have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?
No.
24. Are you sympathetic toward the Communist regime?
No..
25. Have you ever participated in any Cormumist activity:
Ho.
29. Have you ever been employed by a foreign intelligenco, service?
No.
.17

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_119.jpeg ---
14-00000
Office Memorandum
Willing Roser, SR/BOB
William R. Caravay, 0/77/09/1
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
SUBJECT Personal observation of days and Albert
DATE
May, 1957
7
57.
personal opinion at the wo students that received instruction
in First Aid from no. The period of acquittance was our and one half days,
They ere very
ory receptive to the
course and vere able
able to ask intelligent
atorial being presented. When tolny questioned, bota
questions
would give a good dissertation in their answering even though the
problem, Bow to the individuals
Davel In my conversations with have, he would bring up the subject
of hiking and camping, saying that he couldn't see the Recessity in this and
mini,
that be wwald rather live in a house with all of the conveniences at hand,
The idea of physical laber dessa't appeal to nin, he would rather use als brain,
When there was a lali in conversation, he would be the one to start it.
No enjoys motering, and the feeling of being free from these around hin.
Although Dave stated that ho mld like to live alone and do his cocking,
umld
meet
housekeeping and eto,, I get the feeling that most of it is just talk and trac
he would rather have a companion, acessons that would sort of more or less taked
☐ of him.
i
At the dining table, he would eat only these foods he resonised and
those that he enjoyed. He would ask about the others, but would soldam try
thaa
Albert Quiet, vary seldom talked about himself. At meal times be
ate everytting time was placed before nim. laked to insert a little num
§
into life. Beam to sajoy physical exercise as well as a
21:233477
14.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_121.jpeg ---
14-00000
NON-ACCOUNTABLE MATERIAL MANIFEST
10:
Chief, SR
ATTN: Dexter E. ROTENT
FROM:
DATE
11 May 1959
Chief of Fase, Frankfurt
THE NON-ACCOUNTABLE MATERIAL (S) LISTED BELOW ARE FOR STATION USE AS INDICATED BY ONE OF THE FOLLOWING
NUMBERED DESIGNATORS IN COLUMN: 3:
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
DISCUSSIONS WITH LIAISON SERVICES
PASSAGE TO LIAISON
OTHER (SP
OTHER Spec
OTHER
REDSOX/AEACRE
THE FORWARDING OF THE ATTACHED MATERIAL CONFORMS TO CURRENT POUCH REGULATIONS.
NO
2000' Cirarettes
(Note: For AEASPIC-3)
DESCRIPTION:
(2)
Fritza
ATURE
USE
(3)
FORM 1236"
SECRET
201-233477:13-471
57
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_118.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
i
290
SCORE
Are you an agent of the English Intelligence Service?
1
Are you an acent of the French Intelligence Service?
Are you an agent of the Soviet Intelligence Service?
Subject's charts manifested no emotional disturbance
indicative of deception to any questions during tests
XII & XIII.
TESTS XIV & XV
1. Did you have a Rumanian passport
Here you a traitor
Yes
the French Ention?
flo
Now
6. Did the German Police arrest you as you explained to
Yes.
8. Did Jean ADAM blackmail you into committing a robbery
the jewelry store?
Ho
not
9. Other than what you told ne, did you comit any other crimes?
No.
Subject's charts manifested no notional disturbance
indicative of deception to any questions during tests
XIV & XV.
CONCLUSION
A review of Subject's charts showed no reactions indicative of de-
ception to any of the pertinent questions. Subject admitted, prior to the
polygraph test, that he had committed a jewel robbery which is not known to
the French Police. He was assured that we were not interested in prosecuting
him, and he secred to be satisfied with that explanation. It is this ex-
aminer's opinion that Subject is not a member of the RIS or any other foreig
intelligence service.
08/IRD/PIB: vno
18
21-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_122.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Office Memorandum.
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO
80) (Mr. Leutsch
Leutscher)
FROM
Operations Divisio
Medical Staff
SUBJECT
TARIKET, Pavia (5)
DATE: 8 May 1959.
Subject has been evaluated by the Medical Staff and fe
physically
sically calified for proposed assignment
Distribution:
Original Addressee
-
I - SR/DOB (Romer)
1 - CD/MS
SECRET
E. J. CORRIGAN
Administrative Officer
"
E

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_120.jpeg ---
14-00000
Dita displayed a Laas Jatareas.
nated to them. I would say that was
8202
tas maksing a team of trage two is go mais,
to make up where the other lanki,
Training Officer, Uparations Division,
Kodi sa, Stady

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_12.jpeg ---
14-0000
Dearest,
to my
Here is the recond letter that I'm writing you.
you know, it's not only to you that I sent letters
but also to my brother, to the doctor, and to
former sister-in-low, and also to the people with
whom I stayed before leaving you a year ago bout
wrote from here as soon as I could, that is, three
months from that
that time. I never received any reply.
he
at the address ?;
gave? I hope that this time I will
have become luckier for there must certainly be some
reason somewhere. As frequently happens these days,
Ecther the plane which was carrying my letters had
brin
an accident somewhere as or the one which was
back the answers did the same thing
(ie. had an accident), or, more truth, there never
an animes fo
was
clorez
some reason that escapes
me. It is possible also, since 2 travel and
and even abroad,
that the mail went up in smoke. The givaros like
to start fires from time to time
frequently throughout the country and even
interesting
I told you lots of things about the countries.
that I've had a chance to virit, having been almost
wverywhere, but, since I don't like to repeat the same
things riveral times,
will find out nothing
if I do not get an answer to this letter too.
fist returned yesterday from a two month
trip to the north of the country. It's full of makes
Among the Brazilian wome
and brazilian women. Among

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_126.jpeg ---
14-00000
5.
Miscellaneous:
Subject failed to give any information about a cousin of his who is
residing in the U.S.A. Subject told the debriefer that this information
was already passed to George.
Cousin: could be a wachtan Tschishchivili, who resides at the
Oakland Apartments, Columbia Pike, Arlington, Va. Wachtan works for VOA,
GS-11, radio announcer on the Georgian program. He is a member of same
oriental research group which meets at Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C.
:
:
JOSEPH CHACHO

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_123.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
5 May 1959
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT; Coservations during Period 20 April - 2 May of D. Tardent
1. Physical Description:
Height: 5' 6"
Weight: 120 lbs.
Hair:
Eyes:
Black - balk headed
Dark Brown
:
:
Distinguishing marks
Physical Condition:
Missing first joints of right thumb and right
first finger. Wears moustache (black)
Subject seems to enjoy walking and running. He remarked that he could
trot along three miles in one hour.
3. Eating Habits:
Subject is not too impressed with American way of eating, that is,
having all the food put on the table and them each taking a portion of each
course and filling up the plate.
.
Subject feels that more time should be devoted to eating than Joe C.
alloted for eating. He was amazed that it only took the latter about 15
minutes to eat. Likewise, Subject likes to eat one course at a time and
that each course be brought into the room and placed on the table separately.
After the meal he would like fresh fruit, cheese, coffee. He does not care
much for sweets, neither does he care for cottage cheese salad, i.e.,
cottage cheese and canned fruit. This combination irks him. Subject was
assured that this was a manner of eating in America and that it was a
custom and that the undersigned probably would find some faults with the
way the French serve food. Dave enjoys fruit juices.
He puts
Dave eats his food in the manner to which he is accustored.
only one course on his plate and only when finished eating it does he help
himself to the next course, etc..
At breakfast he is a very light eater. He is content just with
coffee, toast and juice.
4. Freetime:
During the undersigned's stay with Subject, most of the freetime was
spent watching TV, walking and attending English lessons. Subject stated
that he wanted to leamish, so the undersigned accommodated him. A
35 cent Cardinal edition of "English thru Pictures" was purchased for hin
and was used as the text book. Subject was coming along fairly well in the
language. Subject is able to manage satisfactorily in the language only
487-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_124.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
2
thing which hinders him is his lack of confidence. Time will probably
take care of his improvement.
5. General Remarks:
He was amazed that he was in the U.S.A., though he was here he stated
that he could not believe that he was here. The relative seclusion during
the past two weeks did not reassure him in anyway that he definitely was
in the U.S.A. Many of his ideas regarding American seemed to be impressions
that he obtained from seeing. American films while in France. Thus he has
a little difficulty trying to place the America that he has observed now
with what preconceived ideas that he already has of America.
While in town on 23 April, his only remark about Washington was that
he did not see any exceptionally beautifully girls (Hollywood types). Ee
also stated that the American males, i.e. American Soldier in 1945, was
nice strong, healthy type of male.
Enroute from the airport Dave wore his blackout glasses until we
reached the district line. while crossing the South Capital Street Bridge
Dave sensed that we were brossing the bridge because of the vibrations caused
by the car passing over the steel mesh on the bridge, stated that we must
be crossing the Fotomac river now. Another question was how far was the
airport from the house where we were headed. The undersigned agreed that
we were crossing the Fotomac and that the area we were going to was over.
fifty miles from the district.
By nature Dave is very curious. To satisfy his curiousity he uses
various ruses in order to elicit information regarding his status and
future..
Whenever the undersigned went for a walk with Dave, usually before
and after meals, the former expected to be asked numerous personal
questions. One or twice, Dave mentioned that he did not know why he was
here, what kind of job he would have, etc.
.
Dave was assured that this sounded somewhat irregular, the undersigned
felt that he must have been told something womewhere along the line. At
this point, Dave would stop asking questions. Later on the undersigned
learned that Dave was very talkative with Tom Miller (alias) and told the
latter the whole story about what was told to date. It is assumed that
Dave was trying to show Tom that he knew everything and thus hope that
Tome would fill any little details that Dave would omit. These were two
different approaches that Dave used trying to elicit information from the
undersigned and Tom Miller.
Dave seems to be quite a perfectionist when it come to things
mechanical. While at the Log Cabin, Dave tried on a number of occasions to
adjust the TV set. Dave could not understand why the TV set sometimes.
would not function properly particularly whenever a passing plane would go
over it would interfere with the sets operation. This account did not
suit him for he had to try and adjust, so as a result more time was
.
expended on adjusting than watching TV. He was quite irked because he felt
that the TV was malfunctioning.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_125.jpeg ---
14-00,000
Dave likes to watch cowboy and gangster films, and the children
toLtte because the participants spoke very slowly
and he could understand the language.
Periodically, Dave would cuestion the undersigned on schedule for the
day and when told what it would be it seemed that he would fall to hear
what was told to him and later on would propose the same question. Dave did
not like the icea that he had to start English from basic he wanted to
have something more advance.
Dave like to test others and it seems that he will continually do so
throughout the course.
Dave did not seen to impressed with the idea that he had to be
debriefed all over again. His comment was that he told this over and
over so many times and that it was not necessary to do over again. At
times when he did not want to answer a question he would state that he
already told this to George and drop the matter there.
1 May 1959:
Shortly before Dave's departure for another safehouse, Dave remarked
that he was not much concerned about the training that he will have to
undergo during the next phase out is concerned more about "der Tat. What
he was driving at was to try to elicit what information he could regarding
the work that he will be required or expected to fulfill once training is
· over, i.e., the mission. Dave was assured that this naturally would follow
only after the completion of the training, then he would be informed by
the people soncerned that at this time such information could not be diven
him.
That evening, the undersigned stayed with Dave and Albert at the new
safehouse. At supper remarked about the manner in which the food was served
that it was not according to French custom. Albert said you eat the way
you want, yet at the same time filling up his plate.
After supper, Dave querying Albert about the property, to whom does the
land belong etc. All Albert could say that it all belongs to the man who
owns the house and left matters drop at that.
Dave was quite witty at the supper meal today. This was the first
time that the undersigned seemed to see him in such jovial spirits. Both
men seemed to hit it off very well. Dave seems to recognize Alberts brawn.
.
Dave seemed to like the cooking better at the new location. He
stated that this place wasmuch better that the other place. He stressed
that the housekeepers here were much better that the others.
2

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_128.jpeg ---
1400000
CONTENTS.
Brief of David's Activities
List of Personal Names
(the full report)
I. DEBRIEFING
General Data
B. David's Childhood
C. Period of WW II -
Pages:
II
VI
VII
VIII
24
1-3
In French Foreign Legion
Poelitz, Stettin, Germany
Flight to Berlin, Achen
Eupen-Malmedy, to Paris
Berlin as photographer
Stahlschnederstr
11:
11
Passport for Foreigners
To "Brazil" (Paris, Spain)
Gought on Spanish-French border
Free France Zone "
"
8-21
(subdiv
8
8
8-9
10
9
11
17
9-10
17 -20
10-11
21
11
32
34
39
44
22
7124at
23
25
11-12
25
27
12
27 - 30
12
31-32
12-13
34
13'
37
13.
45
13-14
52
14-15
-
48 60.
15-17
68-76
17-18
61
67
17
-
78.
18-19
82
19
83 - 88
19-20
20-21.
To Free French Legion, Marseilles
Back to Paris, troubles in Lion
In NSA, Berlin and Atlantic Wall
In Police Force in Berlin
Document forgery (en mass)
(continued)
Financial background, Elackmarket
Contacting the ABWE, in Berlin 77
The Belgian Girl, security precaut?)
" arrest in Berlin 83 - 88
In prison, interrogation, "invention "89 - 96
Transfer to Wolfenbüttel, release, 97 -99
D. Explanations to Activities during WW II,1- 7
E. The Period After WW II.
21
21-22
1- 22
23-24
II.ANALYSIS.
F. Additional destions
26-33
Gö
Characteristic Traits in His Activity.
34-36
H.
Reliability of the Story.
36
J. Security Risk.
37-39
K. Suggested Next Steps.
39
L. Personal Impression made on Debriefer.
40

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_127.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
DEBRIEFING
of
David TZITZICHVILI
C.
Time of debriefing: 28 and 29 April 1959.
Debriefer: Mario K.Giordano.
201-233477
i

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_130.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
David TONEZIONILI
BRIEF of ACTIVITIES
ACTIVITIES:
EDE/ AGE: PLACES
1918.
Childhood:
Georgia
Born, and lived 2-3 years
1921
Faris
The family arrived from Georgia to France.
School: Notre Dame Change of address.
Lycée Montagne
Ecole Communale.
8 or Viroflex
Lycée hoche
Lycée Hoche.
st
Faris-
13 or-Vanves
Ecole Communale. Taken back to:
Thrown out.
Change of address.
Acquintance with Jean ADAM
with old Georgian Resistance men.
School: Lycée Michelet, 6 months, thrown out.
Ecole Communale ( the first ) 11
" Ecole Communale (the 2-nd >
14 n
15.
1937
Chalon-
s.Marne
Faris
11
11
three
months
11
1938 Mar,
-May 39
Dec:39
[1
trade Art et Metier, 1.5 years,
Ecole Breguet, electrotech.
#1
Stole a a library.
dictionary from
Thrown out of home, lived in a hotel
worked in railroad station, at night.
11.
On parole, had to renew documents every 3 mts
Failed to do this, detained for 13 days.
Back in father's home, sent to
School of Photography and Movie. Unfinished.
Volunteered to French Foreign Legion.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00700
j
there are s
really
cute
ones
and leas cute also.
of the cities;
you have to taste them to understand. Evidently, 2-
speaking of the Brazilian
women
women
when one leaves the city it's more like Vasinct and
one's reactions would be to buy a bottle of Airwick
rather than stick his nose there.
It's been rather hot lately. It's summer in
this hemisphere, and when
it
rains the steam
down your back. But with a
back. But with a good fan, a cold
shower, and iced drinks, one manages not to ment
completely.
sure.
2
Iue nothing to do in France,
but
you can be
Honey that I'm always thinking of you wherever
be. Therefore, my
ay
I may
trip o
see you,
even
as this is possible.
intention is to take a short
if only for a moment, as soon
What's happened among you
serice
my departure:
Annik must have found Titi again, Madance Bebert
Monesties has surely moved out. Does melly still put
Les fingers in his more? Does meniée still grimble?
what are you
And you,
the black
Log
you doing? I forgot the name of
yas, Op the pisses.
oh y
Well, now we are
going to speak seriously and
(a) think this letter is going to bring you good news,
but I will not de se conless I'm sure of an answer.
2
When I get one, I willy sand
tidi
you
fixat
come morige
you
to
over and them because I love you, you
and yours. once contact is reestablished 2

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_129.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONTENTS.
Pages:
Brief of David's Activities
II
VI
List of Personal Names
VII
VIII
I. DEBRIEFING
(the full report )
24
General Data
1-3
David's Childhood
C
Period of WW II
8-21
To "Brazil"
D.
E.
In French Foreign Legion (subdiv.:
Poelitz, Stettin, Germany
Flight to Berlin, Achen
Eupen-Malmedy, to Paris
Berlin, as photographer
Stahlschnederstr.
Passport for Foreigners
(Paris, Spain)
Gought on Spanish-French border
Free France Zone
To Free French Legion, Marseilles
Back to Paris, troubles in Lion
In NS, Berlin and Atlantic Wall
In Police Force in Berlin
Document forgery (en mass)
It
,
(continued)
Financial background, Elackmarket
Contacting the ABWE, in Berlin
The Belgian Girl, security precaut79 - 82
arrest in Berlin 83 - 88
In prison, interrogation, "invention "89 - 96
96
Transfer to Wolfenbüttel, release, 97-99
Explanations to Activities during WW II,1-7
The Period After WW II.
II.ANALYSIS.
8
8-9
10
9
11-17
17-20
9-10
10-11
21
11
222
23
25
27.
-
1 1: 1.
31-32
2232
25
11-12
27
12
30
12
12-13
32
-
34
13
34-37
13
39-45
13-14
44
52
14-15
48.
60
15-17
68 76
17-18
61 67
77-78
17
18-19
19
19-20
20-21
21
21-22
1 - 22
23-24
F.
Additional Jestions
26-33
G.
Characteristic Traits in His Activity
34-36
H.
Reliability of the Story.
$36.
J.
Security Risk.
37-39
K. Suggested Next Steps.
39
L. Personal Impression made on Debriefer.
40

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_131.jpeg ---
19-00000
14
-III-
ERIST of ACTIVITIES.
IRIES:
inued
Period of
Dec 39
1940
Paris
Tunis
Barcares
Faris
1942 Faris
mnths Polite
42 Berlin
Acher
A few
days
Volu teered to French Foreign Legion.
French Foreign Legi
ses for Count
L.:Sent to special Gorgian it. /nished.
Discharged after the er
German/French war.
Did not join the Cerear/Georgian special unit.
volunteered for work in Germany
Worked with IDR contract for one year.
Got acquinted with Fasc. Both decided to flee.
Contacted some Georgians,
orgians, said going to Paris.
Falcified his leave travel document; went to
GESTAPO: was ordered to return to Berlin.
Eupen almedy. Illegally crossed the border.
On train/Had luck and help from French employees:
to raris/ twice escaped Gerran controls.
Paris Visited the family.Reported again for work
in Germany (in an other bureau of German Labor
Office), and was sent to a factory in
Berlin
[.
tt
M.
11
Paris
Spain.
Bayonne
as photigrapher.
Suspected in theft, his living place searched.
Troubles with German women. Discharged.
Contacted the Lator Office. Was directed to
work in a factory at Stahlschreiber Street
Met PASCAL again.They decided to flee to Brazil.
They forged leave certificates, got passports
for foreigners, and traveled to Paris.
Visited the family. They started for Frazil.'
Hunger: nobody exchanged their money. They de-
cided to return. 500 = inside France, near
they were arrested by German Custom Guards,
searched, investigated, ordered to return to
Paris, escorted to the train. Had luckimana-
ged to get tickets instead to Paris to -
and crossed to the free zone of France.
Seen by French gendarmes, he invented the story
of wanting to join the Free French Legion.Sent t
Marseilles, to the Regimental. Trouble with Fascal's do-
cuments. Escaped before being arrested.
Pascal went direction algiers. David - to Paris.
David contacted a relative, to get documents for
returning to Faris. Did not get any.
Pau,
Lion
Border of David passed the French post, showing his Ger-
French ac-/man passport. Held by the German post, he re-
cupied ✓ quested being brought to "officer", and there
Zone
☐ he "spoke" himself free, and through to
A few Faris
days.
He visited his mother, and reported to German
Commandantura, for work with NS in Germany.
Berlin-gelheim, drivers courses of the RS.
-Brandenburger Tor, in a drivers unit of NS.K.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_132.jpeg ---
14-00000*
IV-
ACTIVITIES fronti-led, 2)
II, continued
1943 Berlin
renceSt
Paris
Saint
azaire.
BERLIN.
continued.
volunteered to
cast, as driver at the atlantic all cons-
They were taken to
truction.
a a given
David was
rencord trucks to drive to
detate ed to avy. (S. unit).
Later re refused to take an oath, was retur
ed under arrest to punitive camp in
ªszed dad got the permission to contact the
Folice for exployment in police force.
ployed with the Police. Guard duties.
Broze his elbow at ysical training.
In hospital for 45 days, then convalescing.
Falcified convalescence leave papers.
Forged a 3-month" surgical operation"certifi-
cate, to be free of checks with
During this time and already"
police unit
David
was active in blacmarketing with gold and
coffee, and he started document forgery on
larger scale.
e got acquinted with Irakly LORDKIPAHIDZE,
the future husband of his sister Helen..
He knew already asterée SCHMIDT-AZI-BADASSI,
his confidant in forgeries. Other acquintan-
ces in Berlin: a half-jew KATE, French radio-
technicians LUCAS, ALLITES, VILEMAIN,a.o.
He prepared false documents for 14 people,
for friends and unknown people. He made trips-
where he contacted engraver ALLOU and ordered
forged stamps and seals, also fexxiŞİNEER
blank forms of official letters.He traveled to
French-Spanish border 3 or 4 time, to buy coffee, and
brought to, and sold it, in Berlin.
to Paris
Ferlin,
1944
Berlin
Feb.
22 Feb. Ferlin
:
J
T
He used a German soliler in the Commandantura
in Paris, and his wife in Berlin for signaling.
purposes (conventional telephone calls indica-
ting safe arrivals.
He sent his parents and sister, who had come
to Berlin, with false travel documents to
Vimma, his parents being unwitting of falsif.
He contacted the German Military Intelligence
Service" CX ABW" to get employed with it.
He damaged his left hand when a capsule of
an unexploded incendiary bomb exploded in his
hands, in his room, wounding ALLUES also.
A Felgian girl, for whom he was preparing
documents, who should not have known where he
lived, came to his living place just when the
explosion had happened.
He, Katz, Allumes; astrée were arrested
at Anhalter rr station when meeting the
Belgian girl,
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_135.jpeg ---
2 r.
14-00000
-VII-
LIST OF PERSON NAMES
ETERIEF TG RECORD
Page, Chapter, Subdivision.
ADAM Jean 5B6: 60.
5B6: 6521: 2355,7,9,10: 24E11. Also: Jean
ALLGU, engraver, 16c59,60
ALLDES radio engineer, 17063: 19C91, 84: 21097,99.
Asterée SCHMID==AZI-BADASSI 15C51: 19C84
ARFIELD, Jack and brother, 5B6.
BAGRACION, LA3.
BASSONPIERRE De. 482
"Belgian Girl"
19679,82: 20C84,87,88.
BORREAU ELBET Dr 3A6.
CARRE Jaques, 2353.
CASTAGNIET sisters 4B2
CHOUCHOU 538.
CUDC3C 4B2
DATTO = David TZITZICHVILI, 23E1.
David,
De BASSONPIERRE 482
through the report.
De PANASKHET = Achilles TZITZICHVILI,dit De Panaskhet.3A6.
=
It
"
Catherine, 3A6.
Irene, 3A6.
Marie-Helene, 3A6.
De WARREN, Lieutenant, 8C1.
DIREMER,Mr. 433.
DISSMANN = KATZ, 17070.
DRUMOND, Genevieve, 4B3
ELBET Louis, Dr. = PORREAU, 316.
GARGARETHELI, 533.
Georges, 3 A15.
GIVI, 3A15, a cousin of David, in U.S.A.
GOLA, 538.
GOELITZ Ramon, 567a.
GUEDEVANICHVILI, Archilles, 804.
HANAY, DISSMANN, 17070..
Helen
LORDKIPARIDZE, née TZITZICHVILI, 2352. Through the report.
Irakli = Lordkipanidze, 16C54: 23E2.
Jean = Jean ADAM, 23E9: 24E12,13,16.
Joachim, LNU,434.
JOHO or JOHIO, 11c18.
JOIGNY Henry, 18076.
JORDANIA Atia, 3A13.
It
Nathela,316, married TZITZICHVILI, later ELBET.
Redik, 3A12.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_134.jpeg ---
14-00000
TIKE: PLACES
VI-
of ACTIVITIES (Continued,4)
STIMATRIDS:
E. AFTER WW II (continued)
1959 Faris
Jean Idar was arrested; confessed and committed
Davidiy David was arrested on
1950 French-Spanish border.
Paris
Lov:50
Paris
Fresnes
Foissy
Rion.
David was sentenced for 7 years imprisonment
is vife demanded and got divorced from him.
She gave birth to their second child.
Prison de la Santee David was held there for
2.5 years. Later he was held in:
Nimes
Avignon.
His sentence was reduced by 10% on the occasion
of the election of the new President of the Re-
public, and by three months for good conduct.
He was released (he did not mentioned when).
He has not seen his divorced vife since 1950.
(He did not say anything about his activities
after his release from the prison.)

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_136.jpeg ---
KANTCHELI Djibo,
arie
VIII
married TZITZICHVILI David'd mother
KATZ = DISSYAN 17570: 18C73: 19C84: 21097,99.
KEDIA, FN 83489568 22D5, 75
KERESSELIDE3
...
Lec, Leon, 3A8, 9.
Hathée, 2A3,5 3A7,8,9. "athée" through the report.
LORDKIPANI D23 Dimitri 245.
Helen 2352, née TZITZICHVILI, David's sister.
Irakli, 245: 37: 16c53, 54; 21D1: 23E2.
Nodar 2A5.=ZITZCU.
LONGUIN, Georges, 216.
LUCAS, radio engineer, 17C63,64,69: 18674,75,76: 19c79,80
Mathée = Keresselidze, through the report
MINIZINI 7316.
NOVIKOFF,driver, 14039.
PANASKHET, De, 315. (See: De Panaskhet.)
PASCAL, LAU, 806: 11022: 12C26,28: 13033,34.
PARROD, Renée, 2334,-married TZITZICHVILI, David's wife. (1A2)
PEINE, Frenel, 422.
RADEMANN. 16056: 20093.
REGIMBAULT, Père, 432.
ROQUES, FKU, 246.
Sachico, 538.
SANTEX, 4B4
SATARELLI,Mr. 434 = TETINARD.
SCHMIDT-AZI-EADASSI, Astrée, 15051: 19084. = Astrée.
SERGO 5B8.
TCHOLOKASHVILI, Kakhutza, 588.
TELLIER, 7816.
TETINARD = SATAPELLI,434
TZITZICHVILI,Achilles, Atchico, 24: 23E1.= De PANASKHET.
"
"1
11.
11.
"I'
David, 1A1. "David" through the report.
Gabriel, 1A2: 24E19.
Gülga, All: 13035.
Helen, 245; 3A7. -married LORDKIPANIDZE.
Renée, = née PARRCD.
Simon, 143, David's father.
Elizabeth, 1A2.
dit De PANASKHET 3A6,= Achilles TZITZISCVILI.
VILEMAIN,radio engineer.17063: 18074: 19080.
VILI,Fritz, 13036. = David.
WARREN, De, 8c1.
ang
Balf
__
i
WERWERT
-
17070: 18073.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_138.jpeg ---
14-00000
Germany before the father went. David's sister went to Berlin
probably in 1941/1942 (no clear statement about this).
In 1944 Simon, his wife and their daughter moved from Ferlin
to Vienna, Austria. In 1946 they came back to Paris, together
with their son-in-law. In 1948, after the mother had died,
Simon, together with the daughter and the son-in-law returned
to USSR.
From USSR Simon has written one letter in which he had a sked
for literature concerning "the cold" what made David to think
that he is dealing with the problems of refrigeration.
according to the informations received from Mathé KERESSELIDZE
Simon lived in 1958 in TIFLIS.
4. Mother: Marie, née KANTCHELI, of Gærgian origine.
F
The date of birth, 2 February, might have been hers or father
year of birth-unknown.
She poisoned herself in Paris, in 1958, in connection with
Simon's talks of going back to USSR: she did not like to go,
especially because the sons refused to go.
5. Sister: Helen, nickname: Elico, the oldest in the family.
Born: 1 May 1915, in GROZNY.
During WW II she went from Paris to Berlin, where she worked
for six month in the East-Ministry (Ost-Ministerium)..
In 1942, probably in May, she married in Berlin a Georgian,
Irakli LORDKIPANIDZE who at that time worked with the German
Security Service - "Sicherheits Dienst" (SD).
In 1944 she, together with her parents, moved to Vienna, Aust-
ria, where the husband joined them later.
They had two children, both sons: lodar, born in 1945 in Vienna
and Dimitry, born at the end of 1947, in Vienna.(?)
Nodar's nickname is TSITSCU.
In 1946 (?) the family returned from Vienna to Paris (together
with Helen's parents):
In 1943-49 they returned, together with Simon, back to the
USSR (Note: presumed together with their children, although
David did not mention the children).
According to the information received from Xxx Mathé KERESSE-
LIDZE, in 1958 he has seen Helen in Moscow and she had told
him that she is working in Tirlis in quality of a teacher of
languages. She had been detained for five years (1952-1957)
in a camp or closed town because she had said something on
the address of Stalin, in fact nothing bad, but this was mis-
understood and falsely reported to the authorities. She was
vindicated after Salin's death, and she even was paid the sa-
lary retroactively for the time she had been detained.
6. Brother: Achilles, nickname: ATCHICO..
Born: 17 July 1916, in BORZHOMI, Georgia.
Occupation: Architect, selfemployed, associated with two other
architects: Georges LONGUIN and fnu ROQUES, all three having
their office in GAP, Deptm Hautes Alpes, France, corner of
Rue Pasteur and Rue de France. In the firm Achilles uses

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_133.jpeg ---
14-00000
ACTIVITIES (Continued, 3)
TIES:
w II, continued
1944
Berlin
e was held for days, chaired to a heater
solitary arrest, nobody caring for his hard.
er he was brought into a hospital
From there he teleponed the Belgian girl,
asing some civilian clothes sent to hi
The girl promised to bring those. Instead of
her cane policemen and took him to hospital in
Berlin Teglitz Jail
1945
April
"
For months he was datly driven to the Police
for interrogation.
Later he was hold in a cellar
hold in a cellar of the Police HQ.
His father came from Vienna and was allowed to
see him (somewhere where the evidences of his
forgery were displayed).
"ucces
He wrote to "0000" to report an invention of
his to escape being liquidated. He was inter-
viewed by specialsits and asked to work on it.
He, Katz and Allumes were transferred to
-
Wolfenbüttel jail, near Hannover, away from the approaching
front line. He does not know of Asterée's faith.
The Americans freed them from the jail.
He and Allumes went to
Cassel,
where they were officially discharged.
D.F.After WW II.
1945
.1946
1948
1949
1950
Paris
10
"
David wanted to register in an hotel as a French-
man DATTON He was recognized as TZITZICHVILI
by a woman who thought him being his brother,
Achilles.
He was reported to the Sureté Militaire, however
was released after he had explained what he had
done during the war, against the Germans.
He worked with Jaques CARRE.
He married Renée PARROD. (Date not asked)
His parents, sister and brother-in-law returned
from Vienna.
His old friend Jean ADAM contacted him, asked
to participate in roberies. He refused: his moth-
er would have been hurt by this.
His mother died. His father, sister and her hus-
band returned to USSR. Jean Adam contacted him
again, and they robbed a jevelry store.
They tried an other hold-up, but failed. He re-
fused to continue such things: his wife did not
like Jean Adam.
"
Jean ADA came back, threatened to tell all to
David's wife if he won t cooperate. He agreed.
They cased many places, finally decided and made
a hold-up in a banck, successfully.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_137.jpeg ---
1400000
DEBRIEFING
TZITAIC MILI David.
Time of debriefing: 28 and 29 April 1959.
Place
Language used
Safehouse
German partly French.
General Data:
1. The Subject himself: David TZITZICHVILI, nickname: Dathouna,
Born: 12 July 1918, in GORI, Georgia.
Nationality: Stateless.
Family status: Divorced.
/shortended: Dat.
Languages spoken, in sequence of fluency: French, German,
Georgian, and some Russian.
Profession: ?
Visible defects: The tips of the thumb, and of the forefinger
(less than one joint) of the left hand are missing.
2. Divorced wife: Renée, née PARROD, born on 30 August 1917.
Married in Paris, after WW II.
Children: Daughter. Elisabeth, born in March 1949;
son Gabriel, born in Nov. 1950, after the divorce.
Divorced in 1950, after David was jailed, on wife's request.
3. Father: Simon TZITZICHVILI, Georgian.
Date of birth: possibly 2nd February, year unknown.
Profession: mining engineer, specialt: petrol refinery.
Studied in Russia, and one year in Freiburg, Germany.
Historical background: Tzitzichvili was the second-largest
family in Georgia. One area in Georgia is called after this
family. Simon has the title of "Count". He is one of the two
pretenders to the Throne of Georgia, the name of the second
pretender being BAGRACION.
In 1921 Simon, together with his wife and three children,
fled from Georgia via Turkey to France. The family remained
for two weeks in Marseilles, and moved then to Paris.
• They were wealthy then. Simon took a hosiery shop. Later
things went worse, and Simon for a while was a taxi driver.
Still later he tried with some inventions, but had no material
success. In 1942 he went to Berlin, in connection with one of
his inventions. Later his wife followed him. David went to

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00005
you
will send you (plural) or rather I will send
(singular) every month enough to help you substantially
and perhaps
perhaps more. What I ask in
What I ask in exchange is:
1) to send to the people I've mentioned above,
just a little note giving my name and my new
address exactly like this one. Wither more nor less.
3) to ask Annick, Nince, and to write me,
if they will, this litter
and they
bei
being
also for each
they must surely know how happy of the
make me.
this will
In the meantime the days will pass and
I will come to see
you, probably in November or December
unless I kill myself on the
sharp
way,
the rocks are rather
y
you
on the road I'm taking. Then 2 kiss
very very much, you, Annick, Mina, and my
little Melly.
(signed: Edward)
7

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_139.jpeg ---
11
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
a new last name: DE PANASKHET, which he has taken sometimes
in 1946 or 47. Panaskhet is the name of the village in Geor
gia where the family had its origine.
The official full version of Achilles name is now:
TZITZIC VILI dit De PANASKHET. For his children the full
name is but: De PANAS GET
During WW II Achilles was an officer in the French Army,
in Arica and in Germany.
In
n 1944 Achilles married athela JORDANIA, a daughter of
the former President of the Republic of Georgia (1917-1921).
hey are divorced now. Of their three daughters two, both
born in Paris, are living with the father: Maria Helene (14)
and Irene (12. Catherine (6), born in Gap, is living with the
mother, who, since 1959, is remarried. Her second husband is
a physician, Dr.Louis ELECT. The last name of this physician
was formerly BORREAU. He changed it because of the bad mea-
ning bourreau the hangman.
Cousin Mathé KERESSCLIDZE, who had joined the Germans du-
ring WW II and was parachuted to USSR. He was captured there,
sentenced to 15 years of hard labor (1943-58) and was then
allowed to repatriate to France, where he arrived some six
months to one year ago. Now he is in Stuttgart, Germany.
Before returning to France he has occasionally met in Moscow
Helene who had told him of herself and of her father (see
items 3 & 5). (NOTE: Asked by the debriefer, whether Helene
had said to Mathé something about her husband, David mentio-
ned having heard nothing about Irakli. He explained this by
the bad relations between Helene and Irakli: the initial big
love had faded soon. No questions were asked about the child-
ren of the couple.)
Cousin Leo or Leon KERESSELIDZE, a brother of Mathés.
His nickname is: LOULOU.
Father of Leo and Mathé KERESSELIDZE. He was mentioned by
David together with Leo. His address, possibly common with
Leo: VESINET, Seine on Oise.
Uncle Djibo KANTCHELI, brother od David's mother, a taxidriver
who taught David's father in taxi business (he knew to drive).
Uncle's address: 37 Rue de Larochefoucauld, Paris ÌX.
A far relative Guiga TZITZICHVILI. He tried to help David
in Chalon in 1942, but failed. He died later.
Redik JORDANIA, a brother of Mathela, Achilles's wife.
12.
13.
Atia JORDANIA, a sister
it
14.
David's father probably had one brother and three sisters.
15.
Cousin Givi, in the U.S.A., details known to Georges.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_141.jpeg ---
14-00000
5-
made by taxi father had to make many rounds. They got an
one-family house with a garden of about 1000 square meters.
David and his brother went to the "Lycee iloche
6. In Viroflex David lerned to know a boy Jean ADAM, 6 months
older than he himself Jean was the single son of the direc-
David had a fight in
tor of the perfume export house 0.
woods with Jean after he had got a stone drown by Jean on his
head. They were good friends later.
Jean had friends: two brothers AR FIELD ones first name
was Jack, and their nice looking but loose minded sister laud.
When competing in springing from a swing, Jack broke one of
his legs
S. David and Jean peated him on a chair, carried to
the porch of his house and run away.
"
David and Jean grounded "secret club" They built an
in it. The igloo took fire and
Escino igloo and made f
ignited the surrounding field and forrest. The boys fled.
The fire-brigade had to battre the fire. David went home.
He did not say anything to his father about his part in the
brand: he explained his red face by much running when playing
Later the police came David's fault was detected, his fa-
ther had to pay the damages, he had not enough money for this.
7. David's father had, by this time, given up taxi driver´s job.
He was working on different inventions. He was sure he had
discovered petrol fields in France, but he was not believed.
He inventend a device for authomatic replay of records; he
asked for 90% of the intare but was offered 40 only.
Father had a movie projector with which David was not alloveć
to play. Thus, David construed his own projector and showed
it to the father. Father was thrilled, and allowed David to
use his (father's ) projector. David did, and broke it.
7a In this school David made munh nonsences. He thinks that the
reason for this was the need to show up: he was small and his
name made the French children laugh and mock him. He wanted
to show that he was a full guy. He got his third reprimand
He was thrown out
when he burned carbide in an incstand.
when he planted a cracker in a restroom in the garden of
the school and a teacher fell into the bassin of the rest-
room when the cracker exploded. An other pupil, Ramon GOELITZ
had seen him planting the cracker and had reported this.
-
8. In
Iỵ. Viroflex, neighboring to the house where David lived,
resided ten single Georgians who had made some resistance
to the Russians during WWI or after this. David used to
visit those men, he was something like a mascot of theirs.
They had a dog and an ape. They taught David some small trick:
Six of the men were working as taxi drivers for the sub-
sistence of all the group. One stood at home, cooking for all,
and one, Kakhutza TCHOLOKASHVILI, was the boss. David re-
members some names or nicknames of them: CHOCHOU, SACHIKO,
GARGARETHELI, SERGO (died), GOLA.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_140.jpeg ---
14-00000
David's childhood:
1. David does not remember about the kindergartens he had been
in.
He has visited 15 differnt schools.
2. The first school, he remembers, was NOTRE DAME, a Catholic
boarding school in Boulogne sur Seine, where he remained for
two years (4 to 6 years of age). His brother went to the same
school. The oldest of the students were up to 18 years, making
their bacalaureate.
3°
David remembers the names of Père REGI FAULT, the assistant
director, two teachers, sisters ademoiselles CASTAGNIET;
Frehel PEINE - one of the neighbors in the dormitory;
De BASSONPIERRE, a pupil of a higher class, was shot during
the war as a collaborateur; an other pupil: Le CUDO ing
The pupils wore navy-type uniforms with a cat of arms on the
sleeve showing the letters "ND" (Notre Dame).
Of the events he remembers that he could not climb a pole
because his arms were too short, he could not hold himself
tight. Once he saw a blood-stained chair in the school's
dining-room: the director had shot at and wounded during the
night a thief. Once his hair got twisted or pinched between
the bars of the bed; he thought that somebody was under the
bet and was pulling him on hair.
The family lived at that time at Rue Poussin, later at
X Quai de Tokio, which is now called Quai des Etats Unies.
He and his brother were taken to the school normally by taxi
on Sunday night, and brought home on Saturday after the les-:
sons.
In connection with the change of the living place he chan-
ged to Lycée Montargne, Rue Guynemer, when he was 7. He at-
tended the 8th grade, the grades being: 12-the lowest, 1
the highest.
->
There he remembers a teacher Mr.DIREMER (pronounced more),
who had yellow spots on his hands. He is dead now. He had
a son. He also remembers a girl in this school, Genevieve
DRUMOND, who was sitting immediately before him. He liked
the girl very much, but did not dare to show his liking, sauf
by pulling her on hair. They went together to this school up
to the 7th grade.
The next school was "L'Ecole Communale", Rue Littrée, corner
Rue Vaugirard. David's brother went to the same school.
David remembers a teacher Mr.SATARELLI whose nickname was
TETINARD. A pupil SANTEX was good in gym. The father of
a Jew had a curiosity shop, the boy's name was Joachim.
At this time David's father had already given up his hosiery
shop and was working as a taxi driver of a company-owned car.
5. When David was 8 or 9 years of age, the family moved from
Paris to VIROFLAY, some 3 km from Versailles. The move was
i

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_143.jpeg ---
14-00000
throwing of a big knife. This mas
ted and thrown out.
made noise, he was detec-
16. In this school he belonged to the "leading" trio of the
school, the others being an Italian Minizini, about 14, and
á French boy Tellier (13).
· Every Thursday and Saturday the school wert for walks.
Their supervisor probably had a girlfriend whom he visited
during these walking periods, leaving the boys on their own.
On one such a case the trio decided to for drinks in a tavern.
They had all together 13 Francs and some sous. Everybody was
bragging with his experiences with women, and it was decided
to have women. However, Tellier, the youngest backed out, and
so did linzini. Fut ne, David, to show his marliness,went
upstairs with the woman who asked 10 francs. The woman asked
him to wasn himself before the act. le did. The room was cold,
and the water was cold, he nearly "lost" his penis. But, with
the help of the woman, kk⠀xxxkxxx he managed the act, and
felt proud when he returned to the others. However, since then
he had a kind of mixed feelings toward the women, shiness,
fear and attraction all together, and he did not have any
of them for three years since then.
17.
His father was agry with him because he again was thrown
out of the school. Father told that he is good but for a
hog-heard. But, nevertheless, he was sent to an other school,
Ecole Breguet, for electrotechnicians, in 1937.
But, there,also, he was thrown out.
18. Thereupon he left the parents home, lived for three months
in an hotel and worked nightly in the railroad station, un-
loading the oysters. It was a cold job. The father took him
back home and sent him to the school of photography and movie
at the corner of Rue Littrée and Rue Vaugirard, close to an
There he remained
other school where he had been earlier.
for two half-terms, March- July, and October - May, having
not finished the course, because the German-Polish war star-
ted.
19.
i
Sometimes between his going to Ecole Breguet and the
school of photography he had stolen an English dictionary from
a library. This came out, however, he was not put in jail.
The only effect was that his normal identity papers of a state-
less person were withdrown and replaced by temporary papers
He did not do this,
which he had to renew every three months.
and after 6 months he was taken and held by the police for 13.
days before he was given new papers.
!
}
2

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_142.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
11
12.
6-
After having been thrown out from the Lycée Hoche, Dawid was
sent to a communale school in viroflex, some three kilometers
away from their home. He was given money for the street car,
however he did not take the car he used the money to buy what
he needed for his silly things and acts.
At the end of the term David was taken back to the Lycee:his
mother,
probably, had asked for this, and had given some maney
-one can do everything with money e remained in this school
until they moved back to Paris, to Vanves.
David s contact with Jean Adam continued up to the beginning
of the war. David has never abtruded himself to him. He follo
wed many plans of Jean, although he was sure that he could have
made better plans. The parents of David and Jean had nothing
it happe
in common, although they knew one-another. However,
ned that Jean always lived somewhere in the vicinity of David,
and when Tzitzichvili-s moved to Paris Vanves, Jean lived near
the Parte Françon.
In Vanves David was sent to Lycée Michelet. After six months
he was thrown out. They were served some vegetables in this col-
lege at lunch times. Once a plate with vegetables was caught w ☑
by a pupil when this was upon to fall down, and the catcher
was glad. David, however, took the plate and deliberately threw
it to the floor, brook it. The supervisor came and asked how did
this happen. David told the truth, and was thrown out of the
school. -
13. Then David, 13 or 14, was sent to a community school.There he
had to take a test to get the "Certificat d'Etuded" He took the
first, written part of the test, and after it, during the lunch
time he got so fascinated by a bricklayer's work that he star-
ted to help the man, also because he has promised 10 Francs for
this. When he later inquired about the time, he learned that
he was already late for the oral part of the test. So he did
not go for it he continued to work, to earn the promised pay.
However, he was paid nothing, and he was thrown out from the
school.
14. The parents sent him for another communal school in the same
area. There he had a fight with an other pupil who threatened
him with a knife. David forced the knife from him and threw it
away. The knife stuck high in the wall of a house. The other
boy reported the case making him, David, looking guilty, and
he was thrown out of this school as well. He remembers that in
this school there was a pupil who had a device in his mouti. to
adjust his teeths, and the boy used this device to make queer
noises..
15. Then David was sent to a professional school, "Art et Métier",
in Chalon sur Marne. At this time his parents were living some-
where to the east of Paris. There David remained for 1,5 years
and,again, was thrown out because he, instead going to classes
went to the attick of the building and practiced there

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_145.jpeg ---
14-00000
In Stettin David met a KEDIA-man, but again refused to
join this organization, and he traveled to Berlin, met there
Some Georgians, spoke of going to Paris, was asked and took
some letters for delivery in Paris and took the train up to
Achen.
In Achen he asked a Frenchman how to get to France. He was
advised that the German GESTAPO is giving necessary permits.
10. Now David falcified his leave permit, changing the validity
date from 2 to 12 June and went to GESTAPO The falcifica-
tion was not detected. However, he was not allowed to travel
to Paris because his leave and travel document showed but
Berlin as his place of destination, and he was ordered to re
turn to Berlin.
13.
Instead of returning to Berlin David took the train up to
two km from EUPE); in order to pass the ESKEMMIANA border
in the EUPEN MALEDY area clandestinely. ie un asked somebody
for advise how to cross the barder, and he was sent to a man
who agreed to take him over during the night time.
12. David had but 50 German Marks. He told this to the guide
and asked how much he will have to pay him. The man asked
20 Marks. During the night the guide took him to a place,
indicated David a direction and to follow for crossing the
border and to arrive to the railroad station on the other
side of the border. This was all he was offered for the 20 DM.
"
13. David waited until the guide left. Then, fearing that the
guide could have directed him into a trap, he took a direc-
tion 90 degrees to the right of the advised direction, and
followed this direction for about half an hour, and turned
then 90 degrees to the left, thus into the old, advised direc-
tion. Eriginally he had had in mind to turn later once more
to the left and thus to come back to some spot on the origi-
nal direction just opposite of the place wherefrom he started
his walk. However, when he had reached a road, he noticed a
man on bycicle approaching towards him. He hid himself in the
culvert, and when the man was quite close, he, David, jumped
out, frightenend and stopped the man, then asked whether he
is a good Frenchman. Receiving a positive reply, he then as-
The man showed
ked how to procede to the railroad station.
-
him the direction to the next farm, and advised to ask for
further information there it would have been too complica-
ted to advise for all the way. David thanked and left for
the farm The man, glad to escape from his charger, offered
him some cigarettes.
14.
.
David found nobody in the farm. He, thus, proceeded on his
own, and finally reached the railroad station. Sefore boarding
the train, he went to a barber, to shave and to clean his

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_144.jpeg ---
14.00000
C
Period of
II:
-8-
1. In December 1939 David reported in Paris to a depot of the
French Foreign Legion for voluntary service in the Legion.
15 days later he was sent to Lion, and from there, after one
week stay to Marseilles. From Marseilles he was shipped to
Oran, and further sent to Sidi-Bel-Ables in Algier, then to
Tunis Sous to the First Cavalry negiment. There Lieutenant
De WARREN sent him to courses for N:C:Os.
But soon ar order was received to send all Regionnaires-
Georgians to EARCARES where special units had to be formed of
diferent nationalities. At about 110 Georgians, and thousands
of legionnaires of other nationalities were sent to Barcares.
They remained idle, doing but very little exercising.
After the German-French hostilities ended, those foreign
legionnaires were returned from Parcares to Paris and dischar-
ged, including David. He went back to his parents.
40 He looked for work. A Georgian had recommended him to go to
Germany where a Georgian Legion was being formed for the fight
against the Soviets. Archilles GUEDEVANICHVILI was said being
gathering people for this purpose. David's father told him
that a Georgian NEDIA is the man who organizes this in connec
tion with the Germans. David went to this man, had a talk
with him, but did not like the idea.
5. Then David reported to the German Labor Office in Paris,vo-
lunteering as an electrician for work in Germany. He was sent
to POELITZ, near STETTIN, HIDRYER WERKE, with a contract for
one year.
6. He remained there for some three months: a mate of his,
PASCAL (first name), did not like the work, and both decided
to quit, to go on leave".
7. They had no valid German travel documents. It was impossible
to travel with the identity card issued by the factory if there
was leave certificate travel documents issued by the police.
(NOTE: here the story is confused: as the debriefer recollects,
David spoke on the first day of the ebriefing that he had
help from a girlfriend who put into good German the text which
he had prepared for the forged certificate of leave, to visit
his sick uncle in Berlin. On the second day he revoked this,
saying that this must have been a misunderstanding, he had
spoken out of the chronological sequence, about a later case
when he had help from a girlfriend.)
David went to the police in Stettin, and somehow managed
to get the travel documents, valid until 2 June to visit his
sick uncle in Berlin (who did not exist at all).

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_147.jpeg ---
14-00000
19
20
#11
JOHG or JOHIO and, thus, ne learned that this was the mare of
the director. e does not remember the adress of the place
where he lived.
In this factory there was a chemical laboratory with a
Dutch laborant. nis mar showed David some 94ies made of
Asted
platica, which he said using for different mixing work. Later
some of these bowls were stolen. e David, was suspected
and his living place was searched, but he had not taken those
bowels.
31
ater he got in trouble begause he had been to movie with
a German girl. An other girl, who was jealous, had reported
this, and he was fired: a foreigner had no right to go with
a German girl. However, this discharge was made to be "honorab-
le"
an he could apply for a new job.
21. David
David went to the Labor office, showed his discharge papers,
and was directed to a factory in the STAHLSCHREIBERSTRASSE,
Perlin, Moritsplatz. The factory was producing steel ammuni-
tion belts for aircraft maschine guns. The technics used in
this factory were primitive. David invented a simple machine
for adjustment of the right grip necessary to hold the cart-
ridges in the belt. The director was much pleased.
222 In Ferlin David met PASCAL again. They both got the idea
that it is enough for them of the life in Germany, and they
decided to go to South America, to Erazil.
23. They needed passports, such for foreigners. To get those,
they needed certificates of leave from their working places.
Thus, David went to a Labor Office, to the prettiest girl, and
asked for two leave certificates. The girl was obliging, how-
ever said, that the factory must issue the certificates, not
the Labor office. David then explained that he was misunderstee
stood, that he did not ask for the certificates, but for the
blank forms, so he could bring those to the factory.
He got the forms, filled them in, forged an imprint of the
stamp of the factory by copying it over an electric bulb, stole
himself during the night into the office of the foreman and
It was easy
made an other imprint with a cachet found there.
for him to enter the office because he was living in the same
building with the factory, and when he needed warm water for
washing, he had to go to the upper story for opening the valve,
and from there it was close to the "studio" or workshop (atel-
ier): there was not much danger of being seen by the night
guard as the operation did not take long time.
24. With the leave certificates ready, David returned to the
same girl in the Labor Office from whom he had received the
forms..
The obliging girl stamped the certificates "registered"))
antered their names into a cardfile, and thus, David and Fas-

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_146.jpeg ---
14-00000
10-
and
clothes. Be had but 32 German Marks left. He asked the bar
ber how muc the railroad ticket azur-raris would cost
asked alse to exchange als German coneye got the informa
tion and the money exchanged ie had just enough for the ticket
remaining for to
44
ith a few someteat.
35
15. David bought the ticket and borded the train. He asked other
travelers about the controls de was told that the German
military tersonnel is performing the control at the Eelgian-
French border. He thought to leave the train before the bor-
der,
to cross the border clandestinely and then return to the
train, but it was too late he could not leave the car any
more,
tre control-team a Lieutenant a 0.0 and two man
was there already The officer marched up to David looked
him into the eyes, turned his back to David and shouted
the ... to hurry up. David had luck: he nad no documents,
and nobody asked him for those: the .C.O. probably thought
then o
that the Lieutenant had checked his documents ably thought
16. He felt happy, but the others told him that there will be
one more check at the "red zone" ( la zone rouge near
SAINT QUAL. Thereupon. David left the compartment and ap-
proached in the coridor of the car(a railroad employee. He
showed the person his ticket, told that he has no documents,
and demanded that the employee, as a good Frenchman, help
him, another Frenchman, to come to Paris. He was asked to.
wait. The employee soon returned with the chief of the train.
17.
The latter took David to the mall car of the train and ordered
the employee in charge of this car to find a place for David
to hide. A mail sack was opened and David was instructed to
get in. David did, and felt so secure and comfortably that he
fell asleep. He remembers having herd some shouting and kick-
ing-round, however, he was not hit. He was in Paris when the
sack was opened. He felt very in happy, offered money, but he
was told that this was not made for money. He then promised
to give the man some drinks, but in the excitement he forgot.
this. When he later remembered this and returned to the station,
he did not find the person any more.
Two or three days later David again reported to a German
Labor office in Paris, this time as a photographer. He, of
course, did not go to the same office where he had been before,
where they could have recognized him.
13. He got the assignment into a factory in Ferlin, which produ-
ced electrodes wor welding instruments. He had to photograph
samples of material used, and of electrodes produced, for check-
ing purposes, under different conditions. He also had to make
photocopies of different books, and photographs for the identi-
ty cards. The factory was somewhere in LICHTENBERG, not quite
in Berlin (the next day David said that the factory was in
FRIEDENAU). He does not remember the name of the factory, but
he heard the director answering telephone calls by saying
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
__
VIA AIR MAIL
Mr. Robert P. Haghe
P. O. Box 8028
South West Station
Washington 24, D. C.
U. S. A.
27 Oct 1959
Dear Bob
Received your first letter today.
Will take care of the matter. Enclosed
find some envelopes which I think are
very colorful and might be an addition
to your collection.
Paul
Paul
A
_
;
TOLERAN

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_148.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
cal had officially certi
of leave to solicit fr
ried.
the
(the Labor Office) peruits
Passports for Foreigners.
25.
26
They got the passport and they traveled to Paris. David
go to
saw there his mother, spoke her of his intention to
Brazil. This was in 1942.
via Spain and Portugal
David and Pascal decided to
David bought a map, and they started
and they started. They crossed the border
to
to Spain, and got into trouble then, because nobody wanted
exchange their Ger- crew, they could not even buy food.
Thus, they decided to return to France.
27. When they were for some 500 meter back in France, they were
seen by
28.
ted the German custor guards. They were arrested, separa-
put into cells in a cellar. Fortunately, the wall bet
ween the two adjacent cells into which they were put, was so
thin that they could conversate with each other
David, afraid that Pascal could say something wrong when
that
interrogated separately, advised him to say, when asked,
it was David who bought the map. And it really happened that
Pascal was questioned first, and he, duly instructed by David,
could give co-ordinated answers.
29. He, David, was brought to a lieutenant who made a thorough
search, looked into his watch, and even into his rectum.
However, the lieutenant was polite and friendly. David gave
visiting somebody,
some explanation for being in this area
whereupon the lieutenant said that the pasport authorized
David to travel up to Paris only.
-
-
30. They were ordered to return to Paris. One NCO was ordered
to accompany them to the railroad station and to see that they
really will depart for Paris. They went to the station. The
Paris. At the same
NCC ordered tickets for them: Bayonne
moment the NCO was called by a friend away from the counter.
David quickly used the opportunity and asked the clerk at the
counter not to give them tickets to Paris, but instead to FAU,
a station some 10 km from the border of the free, unoccupied
part of France. The clerk objected first, saying that the NCO
ordered the tickets to Faris, but David quickly persuaded him
He got the
"to help other Frenchmen against the Gestapo-man
buti
right tickets. The H.C.C. returned, saw them off,
course, he did not know that David got the tickets to Pau,
not to Paris.
-
of
31. They came to the border. A Frenchman advised them how to
get over the border everybody was ready to help them. They
went, but soon got stuck in mud, and David lost one of his
shoes. It was dark, he could not retrack it.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_150.jpeg ---
14-0000
S
buted to different places in Ferlin. He came to a unit sta
tioned close to the BRANDENBURGER TOR, vis-a-vis to the French
Embassy building, where he had to walt and drive a cab for
eight hours the day. He lived in the same house in front of
which their cars were stationed. He does not remember any
names from the time of this training period. One of his co-
drivers in this small unit was .VIKOF
David remained in this drivers unit in Berlin until, somě
three to four months later, volunteers were called to go to
France,
as lorry drivers to the west coast where the Atlantic
Wall was being constructed. He volunteered, and 15 days later
together with other volunteers, he was sent to Paris.
In Faris they were given French-made Fords of five ton loa
ding capacity (CU - charge utile). The convoy of some 50 cars
each with two drivers, started in direction to SAINT NAZAIRE
At the departure, still in Faris, close to Porte d'Orleans,
one driver had an accidence: he could not take the curb, drove.
on the sidewalk, killed and damaged a few people, without da-
maging the car. David, who interpreted at the spot when the
case was cleared, was ordered to take this car over, because
the driver who just had the accidence, was not allowed to con-
tinue to drive immediately.
42. The convoy was divided into three parts, with David going to
the detachment which was detailed to the Navy. This was approxi-
mately at the time when the British made a mock landing or a
demonstration of a landing.
43. In 1943, still on the French West coast, the MSK men were
ordered to take an oath. David refused, and as the conse-
quence, was sent back to Berlin, guarded by two men, into a
S penal or refractory camp.
44. David asked the leader of this camp, an"Obersharführer"
(equivalent to a N.C.C.),/ later David changed the grade to
"Hauptsturmführer" equivalent to a Captain/, for permission
to contact the Police Headquarters, for volunteering into the
police service. The campleader granted him six-hour leave
to settle his employment with the police, or to face a tough
deal because of his refusal to take the oath.
45.
46.
David went to the Police .Q. at ALEXANDERS LATZ in Berlin,
was accepted and given a note that he had registered for the
service in the Police. He returned with this note to the
NS. camp, and on the next morning he was released on ground
of this note.
undergo
In the Police David had to take physical examination in a
55 and Police hospital. He was found fit physically and was
sent into barracks of which he does not remember the address.
His grade in the police was "Rott-Wachtmeister Dolmetscher"
something as the second-lowest grade in the ordinary police,
-
-

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_151.jpeg ---
4-00000
47
-15-
the SCHUPO (Schutzpolizei). The "Dolmetschef simply indi
cated that he was a foreigner, as the knowledge of languages
was the only reason why foreigners could be employed by the
police lie had nothing to do with interpreting or translating.
They did some exercising and made centry duty at a large
petrol store. His hours
lis hours or duty were, by 24-hour spells: 1300
to 1300, then off up to the next day, 0800 to Sand off up
to the next day,1300, and so one for a week. In the next week
the same pattern repeated, but the start being at 1000 h.
In summer, during an exercise of physical training, a man
who had to catch David when he was coming down from a high
flight into which he was thrown by two men, the catcher got
frightened, backed out, David, as a concequence, fell to the
ground, and broke one arm, the elbow, and damaged the other
arm. He remained for some 40 days in hospital, the same in
which he had the physical examination when entering the police
service.
48. When released from the hospital, he was given a convales-
sence certificate which kept him free of work. He had to go
periodically for checks and for renewal of this certificate.
After he had been for those checks and renewals for a few ti-
mes, he started to forge the signature of the physician and
"renewed" the certificate himself.
49. During his stay with the police force in Berlin, and also
when he was "convalessing", he had a private room hired at
KURFÜRSTENDA 26, or "no exactly" 26 he said not the to
remember the exact number of the house.
-
50. Then he got the idea to falcify a document releaving him
for a longer period of time from checks with the police unit.
This had to be a certificate showing that he had to undergo
a "surgical operation" which will take at least three months.
51. He had a girlfriend, Asterée SCEIDT-AZI-BADASSI, a half-
Azerbaijan, who was fluent in German and in French. David as-
ked her to put the medical certificate into good official
German. Then he forged the cachets and the signature of the
physician, the same who had written the renewals of his dis-
ability certificate.
52. He presented this forged certificate to a clerk in the offi-
ce of his police unit. He was on good terms with the clerks
there, he was a "friendly foreigner" who joked and spoke abou
Paris. This clerk took a short look on the certificate, made
corresponding notes in his files, and this was enough for David.
for the case that somebody would ask about his whereabouts:
he did not need to rely any more on the forged document: the
clerk had made an official entry into the books, and there
was no way to check, neither to doubt in this entry.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_149.jpeg ---
T4-0
-13-
32. Then they were stopped by the French gendarmes who thought
that they were Germans. David quickly invented the story of
their flight from the occupied one for joining the Free French
Legion. e gendarmes took them to a village where David could
buy a pair oshoes, but alas, canvas shoe only, and of too lar-
ge size. Then they were directed to a company of that Legion,
to
the chief of this company gave them a horse cart to
in arseilles, Camp de Sainte Marthe,
go to the tgimental
7
33. There arrived, David advised Fascal to go to the registraț
the first, so they both could see whether he, as a Frenchman,
will be accepted without showing his German passport. David,
being a Georgian, did not want to go the first.
Pascal went. s story was not believed. To prove his being
a Frenchman and not a German as suspected, he showed his Ger-
man passport for foreigners. This made the situation worse,
and Pascal was happy to get out without being arrested.
34. Both retreated.
David decided to return to Faris. Pascal
did not want to return and said that he will go to Algiers, to
get a job on the construction of the Algiers - Nigeria rail-
road. They departed.
35. David, on his way back to Paris, reached Lion. There he went
to one of his far relatives, Guiga TZITZICHVILI, and asked
whether the latter could help him to get a permit to go to the
German-occupied Paris. Guiga thought this being a simple
matter, because he had a good friend in the Security (Sureté).
However, the relative failed, nearly got in trouble himself,
and advised David to dissappear quickly, what the latter did.
36. Somehow David managed to pass the French control by showing
his German passport. The guard misunderstood his difficult na-
me, and let him pass as Corporal Fritz VILI.
37.
But the German post stopped him, David, and started a sking
different questions. David demanded to be brought to the chief
of guards. He was taken to a N.C.C., whom he, again, asked to
Sturmbanführer"
be brought to an officer. He was brought to a
(Major in the SS). David explained to this officer something of
having visited his brother in Harseilles. The officer nicely
helped him to return to Paris.
38. Back in Faris, David went to the parents. The mother mocked
him about his quick return from Brazil.
39. Soon David reported to the German Commandantura in Paris,
to volunteer as a driver to the S, the Transportation Corps
of the Nazy Party. He was accepted and sent to Berlin, MUGEL-
HEIM LAGER, close to OSTKREUTZ. He knew to drive, he had a
driver's license since 1938.
After some three or four months of training they were distri-
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_152.jpeg ---
-16-
53. During those three months of "surgical operation" David
get in contact with axi1 LORD IPARIDZE, a boyfriend of his
sister relen who worked with the East-inistry (est-iriste-
rium). Irakly, who worked with the "SD" (Sicherheitsdienst,
Security Service), and who later married Helen, had just re-
ceived order to go to Paris.
54
E
David asked Irakli to give his travel document or order
for a short time to him, so he could show those to his suppe
rior and to ask for similar ones Irakli obliged. David pho-
tographed the documents he had no intention to show those
to his boss, he was going to make his own documents.
137
55. is sister brought him some forms which were used in the
Ost-Ministerium, and he collected others more from different
offices.
:
56. Thus, David prepared for himself a falcified travel docu-
ment to Paris, signing it with the name of Police President
RADEMANN. This name he has used on many documents in later
times.
5787. Before using this document he checked it, or made a re-
hersal with his girlfriend. He gave the falcified document to
the girl for inspection, and then, soon after this, he pushed
his genuine police passport above the false paper, asking the
girl about her reaction and findings. She said that she had
understood that the first paper was a travel order, but she
had not had enough time to read it through, in full. This,
David explained, was the trick: one has to give the falci-
fied paper first, and then, without giving the checker enough
time for its study, insert an other, genuine doccument which
would attire the attention of the checker, detract it from the
falcified one.
58. David used this trick with the controls and had a smith
journey to Paris.
-
59. In Paris David contacted the engraver ALLCU, corner of the
streets Rue Filles du Calvaire and Beaumarchais.
He asked Allou to prepare for hind seal of the German
Leadquarters. The man consented after a short hesitation, af-
ter David had spoken of Frenchmen's moral duty to help other.
Frenchmen against the Germans. The same man made for David
later many more seals and stamps of different German offices,
like the Security Service, the East-Ministry, the Labor Office
the Police Headquarters and the travel permission stamp for
the passports.
60.
By the intermediary of this ALLOU David let also be printed
different forged letter- and order-forms of the above mentio-
ned offices, in thousands of copies, sofar those did not have
filigéee nets printed in. However, he personally was able
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_153.jpeg ---
:
61
62
63.
64
to prepare by hand the filigree net if the document needed it
To the question of the debriefer concerning the expenses
of all this immense work David explained that all this cos-
ted him over 100,000 French rancs
rancs. Later he changed this sum
to 140 co to 150 000 rancs
8"
At first he made money by reselling golden watches of his
friends, as well as other objects, receiving good gains.
Then he had three friends in Berlin, French radio-engineers
who had been brought to compulsory works to Germany but later
released. The last names of those Friends were: LUCAS, ALLUMES
and VILEMAIN Lucas and vilemain wanted to have traveldocu-
ments to Paris. The father of Lucas was a wealthy man in
Paris.
3
When David was preparing for his own journey to Paris, he
let Lucas write a letter to his father, asking him to give
David 200,000 Francs. The father obliged.
65. Besides, and e specially after he had his caches ready, he
earned plenty of money through his operations on the black-
market, buying coffe at the French-Spanish frontier for 50 Ger-
man Marks the kilogram, and reselling it in Berlin for 900 to
1200 Mark the kg.
66. He personally had made 3 or 4 trips to the Spanish border
for coffee, and four other men have done this for him.
67. Those trips were easy, especially the French part of them
on which were no special checks. Nor were the trips dangerous
because the luggage of military personnel was not searched,
and nor was the luggage of police force.
68. When making and using these confeit seals, one had to pay
attention to the number of the unit in the seal which to use:
those numbers referred to the type of the work and the impor-
tance of the offices, f.i. "10" would show that the scal was
of an unimportant small office, whereas the right number to
use was perhaps three or four..
69.
Before letting LUCAS to use the forged papers, David wanted
to check the papers on somebody else.
70. David had a half-Jew pal RATZ-DISMANN. His mother, born
HAKAY, Hungarian, had married a Jew Katz, and later, in a se-
cond marriage - Dissmann
- Dissmann. A son from this first marriage was
now using the name of DISSHANK, however, was urder the pressu-
re of a certain WERWERT who knew of his Jewish origin.
Katz asked David to prepare papers for the Spaniard WERWERT
for an official trip to Spain. David agreed, however asked for
two old genuine Spanish passports for this purpose.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_154.jpeg ---
14-00000
71
72
74.
75.
-18-
e got the old passports, those could be easily bought on
black market, and out of those two passports he made a new
one for Werwert.
David went into details in describing how he prepared the
passport, e specially how he exchanged the photograpa which
was fixed by grounets, andthus, could not be removed and simp-
ly replaced. He had to use plenty of skilled washing and
ter-photography for renouving the old image and replacing it
by the new one without damaging the passport, nor the "photo-
graph itself
4
as
Werwert used the passport. He was instructed by Katz to
report in Spain to a priest who was in contact with Katz
The signal from the priest came, Werwert had arrived without
trouble.
was not At this occasion atz disclosed to David that Werwert
a Spaniard, as pretended, but a Cerman.
How David prepared the documents for Lucas and Vilemain:
to report as specialists to the Labor Office in Paris.
David had arranged with Lucas to acknowledge his safe arri-
val in Paris. The woman, in whose house the Lucas es lived
in Paris, was working in the German Commandantura in Paris.
Through her David learned to know the name and the address.
of the family of a german soldier operator of the switch-
board of the Comandantura in Paris. The family lived in Ber-
lin. Some coffee was given to the soldier and he was urged
to phone his wife in berlin and to tell that he had received
some coffee for her. This was the signal announcing safe
arrival of Lucas in Paris. David told that this signal was
used in some ten cases.
76. David had issued false travel documents to some 14 persons.
One of them was a friend of Lucas in Berlin, whose name and
home address were: Henry JOIGNY, 5, Rue Saretti, Paris XV.
77.
78.
Somehow David became an idea to join the "ABWEIR" of the
German Armed Forces, something more important and exiting
than his previous activities. He had no good idea of the
real scope and of the structure of the "Abwehr". He went
to the house of "ANT ABWEHR, OKN" in the WILHELMSTRASSE.
The porter at the entrance asked him to which branch he
wanted to go. David told "West" whereupon the porter had said
that he should go to" West Einz" (I West), and instructed him
into which room to go. There David found an officer wo ex-
plained to him that the office had been moved to TARE,in
POTZDAM.
David went to Potzdam. It took him hours until he found
TANNE, an area surrounded by barbed wire, heavily guarded,
all guards being N.C.Cs. He showed his police passport and
asked to be brought to the chief of the guards. He was brou-

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_155.jpeg ---
AANMERKAB TUNNEWARINING A
LEARNSLE}}}
79.
-19-
brought to a Lieutenant who took him to a Colonel. The latter,
having heard that David wanted to get employed, this means that
he did not belong to the organization, got mad, did not belie-
ve that an unauthorized perser could have penetrated so far,
(into a top secret area), and cu how he learned about the
place. David told his story. e colonel checked or phone with
the police H. and got the reply that they have such a Ean.
David then was asked what he could do, his name was registe-
red will be contacted later.
and he was told that he
Through a chain of persons, linked to LUCAS, David got a
request to prepare documents for a Belgian girls journey to
Paris. ne consented.
80. He met the girl, like many other persons, outside of his
living place, on different places, and under good security
precautions, f.1.: somebody entered the meeting place on his
behalf and asked the person who was awaiting him to come out.
David, was at that time out observing the environs, to see
whether somebody would be surveilling his two persons
If there
was no surveillance, then he folloved his people, approached
them in a safe place. He never brought them to his living
place. But LUCAS and VILEMAIN had been to his quartèrs.
e
81. Before he had finished the documents for the Belgian girl,
he and ALLUMES had found after an airraid, an unexploded incen-
diary bomb. Allumes had explained that such a bomb, having not
exploded when coming down, is harmless. They took the bomb
to Lavid's living place, and David, cautiousely, tried to take
out the capsule. The capsule exploded. The thumb and the fore-
finger of his left hand were damaged, and Allumes got a splin-
ter into his face. The landlady was mad: the fools are playing
with bombs, ruining her hause which was saved in the airraid.
She wanted to report them to the police, but David calmed her
down, saying that he himself will report the case, he himself
is a policeman, a.s.o.
82.
-
At the same time the Felgian girl happened to come and saw
David injured. She showed no grief because of the paines cau-
sed to David and the loss of his fingertips, she was angry
that she could not have her papers and could, thus, not start
her pleasure trip to Paris.
83. It took injured David three days until the documents for the
girl were ready, and an appointment was made to meet her in
the ANHALTER RAHNHOF wherefrom the trains to Paris were star-
ting after the Potsdamer Bahnhof was demolished. The meeting
was fixed for 2200h.
84. David went for the meeting together with ALLUMES, KATZ and
ASTEREE. They found the station rather empty and they thought
that they had come too early. Fut then David noticed the

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_156.jpeg ---
F00000
1401
FT
JAMA
!
!
-20-
:
Belgian girl just at the platform gate. He approached
her
She told David that he will be arrested immediately, and in-
deed all around there came men with machine pistols ready.
All but the Belgian girl were arrested, and hold separately
his was on 22 February 1944.
85. David was held for a few days in a room chained by his right
hand (the undamaged hand) to a heater. Nobody spoke a single
word with him. he was brought some food like it is being made
with a dog.
86. lis injured hand was not cared for at all and started
fester. When he lamented about this, he was transferred to
a hospital where he was put into a large ward together with
many more people
87.
è noticed a telephone in the coridor of the Hospital. He
asked a coin from a Dutch patient and phoned to the Belgian
gerl, asking her to bring him some civilian clothes. He still
did not believe that this girl had betried him.
.
88. The girl promised to come to see him the next day at 100CH.
He sure, get a visit the next day at 10, but by guards who
took him to the hospital in TEGEL jail. Now it was clear to
David that the Belgian girl was in contact with the German
police..
89. From the Tegel jail he was daily taken for questioning to
the police H.Q.
90.
91.
:
A few months later, when his fingers had nearly healed, he
was transferred into a cellar of the police H..
!
His questionning continued for nine months, with the sessi-
ons at first daily, then two to three times a week, later
once in a week or biweekly. The charges were heavy: grave
forgery, damaging the security of the state, demoralization
of the foreign. laborers, helping the POW to flee, and espio-
nage (some photos of the bomb-damaged Berlin were found in
his living place).
92. Sometimes before his arrest, David had organized the move
of his parents and sister from Berlin to Vienna, of course
with forged traveldocuments, however, the family being not
aware of the falcifications.
93.
After his arrest the parents came from Vienna to see him.
He does not know whether they were brought by the authorities
or did they come at their own initiative. The evidences of
his crimes were displayed in the same room where he met his
father. It was then that the father learned that he, David,
had forged the traveldocuments for the move of the family,
that there was no police president Rademann whose name the
documents showed, that David had invented this name. His
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_157.jpeg ---
T4-00000
-21
father was very much
was very much embarrassed
94. During the interrogations David was asked many times for
whom he did all those things, for which intelligence service:
robody believed that a single person could have achieved so
ruch without any big foreign service behind him
955 the police inspectors had hinted him that he would not es
cape the death sentence. To gain time, he wrote a letter
to "C008" and reported an invention of his; a motor which
worked without gas, in those days, Germas being very short
of gas, such an invention should attire attention.
96. He was contacted and asked for details of his invention.
e told something and requested better living conditions and
focd, so he would be able to work on this invention. He also
mentioned that some details of the invention are in Vienna
and should be brought from there to Berlin. (At that time
Vienna was already occupied by the Russians) Later two
specialists were sent to him, to check his information. They
found that the idea was acceptable theoretically, and he was
urged to continue to work on it.
97. In connection with the approach of the front to Berlin,
they, this means David, Katz and Allumes, were transferred to
WOLFENFUTTEL jail, near HANNOVER. He does not know what happe-
ned to Asterée.
98. In Wolfenbuttel they remained for some three months, until
the Americans freed them in April 1945.
99. They went to ether to KASSEL Discharge Camp, wherefrom he
and Allumes went to Paris, whereas Katz went his own way.
D. Additional explanations to the activities during WW II.
1. The photographs which David had made of the documents of
Irakli Lordkepanidze were not good enough. So he had to en-
large the photos as much as he could, up to the size of a few
square feet. He ameliorated the enlarging by some pencil work.
Then he re-photographed the enlarging and produced new, good
photos of the documents in the exactly right size of the ori-
ginal documents.
2.
3
All the photographic lab work was done in his hotel room.
He used two MINOXes and one CONTAX, and a French type enlar-
ger with the objective of his Contax. The equipment costed
him over 100,000 ( it was not specified whether French Francs
or German Marks).
"
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
COPY
25 et 60
Dear Paul,
Enclosed is one letter from David informing all concerned
his change rost office box to: Eduardo Callo, Cahxa Postal 11744
(Lapa) Sao Paulo, Brasil. It is dated 29 Tebruary, so please forward
on or just after that date. Thanks very much for your help.
Sincerely,
EOP
(This letter forwarded to Frasil for remailing 25 Feb.
1900 at 1300 hours).
201-233477
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_159.jpeg ---
-23-
:
e Feriod after H II:
ne
fter the return from hassel ischarging Camp David wanted
to register in Faris as a Frencaman using the name of DATTO
owever, a woman servant of the hotel thought to have recog-
nized in him his brother, achiiles Szitzicavili. The Surete
111taire was contacted Lavidad to give the names of the
people
Ople whom he had helped during the war against the Germans.
inally, he was released, however not allowed to use the
Dame of DATTO
2.David's parents and his sister elen with his husband Irakli
(NOTE: their caldre were not mentioned by David) returned
From Vienna to Paris in 1946, helped by cles.
In Paris David worked with Jagues CARPE, 166 Boulevard Vol
taire
He learned to know aenée PAPRCD, and married her. He has
not seen her since 1950. (for details see à 2.).
In Paris Jean ADA contacted David again and asked him to
participate in a hold-up. He refused, reasoning that his mo-
ther would die if she would learn of this.
6. David's mother died in 1948, and some two months later
his father and sister with her husband returned to the USSR.
7.
S.
After the death of David's mother Jean Adam contacted
David again, and insisted on his participation in the hold-
up in a jevelry. David consented.
To start with the held-up, they needed a car. They hired
a taxi for a drive to some 10-12 from Paris.
When the car was passing through a forest, David Crew his
pistol and forced the driver to stop and to abandone his car.
The driver was promised that no harm would be done to him if
he obliges.
:
9. They parked the car close to the jevelry shop which they
planned to rob. Jean went over the street, and watched the
window of the jevelry shop. David entered the shop and asked
to show him a ring which was in the window. When the shop-
keeper opened the window, this being an agreed signal, Jean
entered the shop. David pulled the pistol, and they looted.
the shop. They fled xx in the car which they later left near
the police station, with a 500 Francs bill pinned to the dri-
ver's seat. reimbursement for having used the car.
-
10. One month later they tried an other hold-up, cut this did
not work. Daviv did not want to continue such things and told
this to Jean. David's vife did not like his contact with Jean,
although she did not know anything about their common doings.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_158.jpeg ---
22
David's father needed money for his inventions. David gave
hi 100,000 D through a third person, his father not owing
This was before David's "journey
from whom the money came
Brazily
-n
4. David had plenty of money
money, mostly earned by selling coffee
on black market. Once he nas bought in Berlin for ten kg
coffee a car, an Opel.
r
e Georgians
gians in Zerli did not know of his doings and
although! ixed with the cor dia
lations in Ber1360
NEDIA cow anything and was puzzled by this. when arranging
the wedding party of his sister, in Tay-June 1942 he asked
edia for his car. The request was refused. David, then, hired
or 5 cars for a full day (paying with coffee), and it hap-
pened that edià saw hd coming with his caravan of cars,loa-
black
ded with vines and other good things which he had bougat
for the feast. edia had asked him about the caravan, ad Da
vid had replied that edia can now see that David can have as
many cars as he just lizes, althoug Radia did not give his
when asked.
6. For the move of his parents from Derlin to Vienna David had
reserved an appartment in the train, again using false docu-
ments. To this he said that it is difficult to get reserved
a seat for one person in a train, but it is easier to reserve
a full appartment of a car for one person, or a complete rail-
road car or train for a special reason, because the greater
the request, the higher authorities make the request, the
higher authorities decide the issue, the less effective is the
factual check of the genuit the request and of the docu-
ments by which the request is made.
these
7. As to the motives of his not joining the Georgian Legion:
He, David, does not feel being a Georgian, or too much of
a Georgian. He hates the Russians in general, although he
has nothing special agains any particular Russian. The Rus-
sian communists he dislikes even more than the ordinary Russian
There was no real reason why he did not join the Redia
group - he simply disliked the idea. NOTE: this contradicts
with his statements made during the first day of the debrie-
fing, according to which he was ready to fight together with
anybody (even with the devil's grandmother) against the com-
munists..
ans.
"

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_164.jpeg ---
14-00000
-28-
ADDITIONAL QUESTICKS
a.When was David sent the courses of N.C.Os?
b.who was the officer in charge of these courses?
his imediate supervisor there
when they were sent to BARCARES?
How long they stood there
When he was returned to Paris and discharged?
His acuress after the discharge
with the parents?)
Which identity documents he used when registering with
the Lator Office for work in Germany, POELITZ?
Where did he live in PCELITZ?
What was his job in the factory?
How much he was paid? The method of paying weekly,
beweekly, or how?
Which identity papers he had when outside the factory?
7. a. How did he get the travel permit from the Folice in
Stettin? What did he show to the police for this pur-
pose?
b. Did he go together with Faskal to the Police?
c. Did they (or he) have leave permit (s) from the factory
d. Where did he live during his stay in Berlin?
8. a. How many letters he took with him from Berlin to Paris?
9.
11.
b. Who gave him those letters?
c. Where did he hide the letters when en route?
d. Did he deliver the letters in Paris? How?
(His story of going in Achen to the GESTAPO to ask for
a permit to go to Paris, when having on himself dif-
ferent letters, and when in possession of but a
leave travel permit to Berlin, with a forged date,
seems unbelievable or most imprudent). Therefore,
-
he should be asked to repeat the stepy about his steps
in Achen which he made to become a leagal permit for
the trip.
Which documents David had on himself when crossing the
border at Eupen-Halmedy?
17. a. Where did his parents live at that time Give address.
b. When was this?
18.
( David said not to remember where he lived during his
stay with the JOHO factory).
a. How long it took him to arrive to his working place,
and to get home in the evening?
b. Which means of transportation did he use?
c. When was the search made in his room?
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_162.jpeg ---
A
26
ADDITIONAL BESTIONS
a Other visible defects (the damaged elbow: )
b. Religion?
Relatives and friends with whom he correspondes?
d. Any real or dlai-ci connections with political parties?
ationality of his divorced vife
er religion?
nen married?
Addresses on which they lived together
st address of the family known to David?.
When was the divorce requested?
HEL
When granted?
When did David see his wife for the last time:
h. When did David see his children for the last time?
Father s year of birth.
b. is last address ir Paris
C
Cr age?
The date of his departure from Paris to USSR?
4. a. The date of mother's death?
16.
b. Mother's year of birth? Or age when died?
5. a. When did
When did Helen go to Ferlin? On which terms?
b. When did she work with the East-Ministry?
C
Where else has she worked in Berlin or Germany?
d. When was she married to Irakli ? (1942 or 1943?)
(In which church and/or registrar's office, and where.
feted?)
Where did the couple live in Berlin?
f. When did Helen return from Vienna to Paris? Together
with whom? (1946, with husband and parents? What about
the children? )
6
When was Dimitri born, and where? (in Vienna, end of 47%)
h. Together with whom did she go to USSR?
(Nothing was mentioned about the children.)
a. Any information concerning Irakli LORDKIPANIDZE,
b. and his relatives?

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_160.jpeg ---
14-00000
L
:
11
black
One year later ean Adam approached David agair
mailed him into continuing to participate in his roberies: he
hreatened to tell everything to David's wife 1 the latter.
would not cooperate David went along.
12. Jean had no plans t
but he needed money. First they
1 to fob so-ebody whom they would have seen receiving
dière
money from some bank. They tried to watch at
rent banks
banks, but they could not see from the street through the
Indows up to the counters
13. To help ent, they equipped their car with a concealed peris
cope, and they could see better. But this too, did not helpė
David at the periscope had never enough time to describe the
person to Jean well enough so he could recognize and attack him
or the person went in a wrong" direction where he could not
be attacked.
14. They had no difficulties with the car, although this was
stolen They parked the car in the courtyard of the police
headquarters, together with the cars of the policemen and of
some other private persons. Besides, the car was foreseen
with a forged registration plate, showing the number of a well
honorable person.
15. At last they decided to make an ordinary hold-up in
June 1950.
Everything went smoothly. This was in
16.
a bank.
Soon after this Jean attired the attention of the authori-
ties by too lavishly life. He was arrested and confessed, in-
plicating David also.
17.
David fled, but was arrested when trying to pass the French-
Spanish border.
19.
19.
David was sentenced to 7 years in jail.
His wife requested and got divorced. She was pregnant at
that time, and in Nov.1950 gave birth to their son. Gabriel.
20. David was hold successively in the following prisons:
Paris, Prison de la Santée for 2.5 years, later at Fresnes,
Poissy, Fion, Nimes and Avignon.
21.
The sentence was shortened by 10% on the occasion of the
election of the new President of the Republic. Three month he
got granted for good conduct.
22.
David said having never been cut for gain: he had made all
this for excitement. He did not like roberies because there one
had to threaten, or even to use weapons against, innocent people.
He has often had boxes full of money, not knowing what to do
with it. If now consenting to do things for the Arericans, he
The would not ask for money, he would take what he will be offered

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_161.jpeg ---
14-00000
-25-
II
ANALYSIS
The debriefer was instructed to conduct the debriefing
most friendly way, so that David would not get suspicious
about the purpose of this debriefing.
David was asked by Charles to tell the debriefer his full
so that this could be used in planning of the cover-stor
for his future activities.
story
G
In compliance with those instructions, the debriefer gave
David full freedom of telling the story in his own choosen way,
without being much interrupted. He was asked but a few explana
tory questions, sofar those could be inserted without causing
any suspicion, and sofar the debriefer was in the situation to
put those intelligently: he himself did not have much advance
information on David. In some cases David asked whether an
item he was just telling, was important or necessary for the
planning of his coverstory, what in most cases was confirmed.
4.
However, David did not give the full story in its de-
tails. Besides, there are some centradictions between the diffe-
rent parts of his story. Some events, as described by him, seem
to be unbelievable.
5. Unfortunately, the debriefer is not in command of short-
hand, and he had no support of consealed tape-recording. Thus,
short key-notes and the memory of the debriefer were the only
sources of information when the debriefing report was later
written. Due to this, some details of the story got lost or
confused, especially when it appeared that David changed some
details during the second session of the debriefing.
6. To clear those points, additional questions should be
asked. Some of those questions can still be asked without alar-
ming David's suspicions, whereas others are of a kind which would
certainly show David that those are asked for control purposes.
This shlould be born in mind when drafting the final list of
additional questions, and when deciding the conditions under
which those shall be asked.
7. The here given list of additional questions is but a
tentative one, drafted on the basis of this one debriefing re-
port only. (See: K,1 and 2.).
The capital letters and the numbers in front of each
question refer to the corresponding items in this debriefing
record, or, if such items do not exist, indicate the need to
cover additional items.
The small letters are for later references to the addi-
tional answers or sub-items.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_163.jpeg ---
B
27-
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS
13
David has said that he has been to 18 schools. He listed
eleven schools, with two sections in one of them thus
together 12 schools ca are the six not mentioned?
He should give a full list of schools, in chronological
order, together with the addresses of the family at those
periods.
18. a. In which hotel did he live when working in the rail-
road station
19.
Who was his employer?
How much he was paid for the work?
Which were the hours of his night job?
What did he do during the days?
From which library did he steal the dictionary?
(ame and address?)
he live at that time?
b. Where did he
Where did he live six month later when the police
arrested him?
Where was he detained on this occasion, for how long?
Had he to continue to renew the identity papers every
three months? For how long this went this way?
f. Was he later issued new, permanent identity documents?
(When, by whom, which documents?)

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_165.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
:
.29:
10.d. At what time of the day was the search made?
was he present at the search
20.a. For how long did he remain with the JOHO factory?
What was said in his discharge papers 23 reason o
discharge
21. a. hich home address did David report in the Labor Office
in Ferlin when applying for a new job?
22.a.
b.Did he show his release certificate from the previous
working place?
here did David meet Pascal in Berlin? When was this?
b. What has Paskal spoken David about his life and adven-
tures during the period of separation?
Where did Pascal live in Berlin?
23.a. Which stamp did David coppy on the electric bulb to his
forged leave permit? (Give the text of the stamp or seal
b. Which stamp did he imprint on the same permit in the
office of the foreman?
c. Why did he call the office of the foreman an "atelier"?
d. Did David forge the leave permit for Fascal also?
24.e. Did David go back to the Labor office together with.
Fascal or alone? Or alone with both certificates?
25.a. What was the reason to ask for Passports for Foreigners?
b. Which country of destination was mentioned in their
requests for passports? ( David has said that the pass-
ports were made out for a journey to Paris only. It gamm
seems being unbelievable that such passports were issued
for a travel to Paris which was occupied by the Germans)
c. For how long a period was the passport valid?
d. On which address did David's family live at that time?
€. Where did he stay in Paris at this occasion?
f. Where stood Pascal?
g. Was there no search for him after he dissappeared from
the factory? (His mother could have known of this if
he was looked for in Paris.)
-
26.a. How much money did he have when starting from Paris
to Brazil?
b. How much had Pascal?
c. In which currency was this money?
d. Which identity documents did he have for this journey?
Were these documents already prepared for their journey.
to Brazil? How, which entries they had?
27.a. On whom was the map when David and Pascal were caught
by the guards after they had returned from Spain?
b. Which guards caught them?
:;
1

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_166.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
-30-
28.a. Why was it necessary to instruct Pascal to say that David
had bought the map
:
what else did he instruct Pascal to say or not to say?
How does he know that Pascal was questioned first?
r.
What questions was Pascal asked to which you had prepared
coordinated answers?
29. a.which explaration you gave to the officer for your presen
ce in the border area?.
-
b. Which explanation gave Pascale
Were you present at the interrogation of Pascal?
Which relations between you and Pascal did you report?
10. d. mich rela ask for tic
a
Why did you ask for tickets to PAU?
b. low much did the tickets to PAU cost
How much did those to Paris cost?
Who paid for the tickets: In which currency?
Was PAU on the normal direction from Eayonne to Paris?
37. a. What did David tell to the officer about his presence
in Lion and wherefrom he was coming?
b. Did he spoke something about his brother? What?
c. What had he said, where was he coming from?
38. a. Where did the family live in Faris when David returned
from this trip?.
b. When was this?
39. a. Which identity papers David used when reporting in Paris
for the employment with the NSKK?
b. Did he have to show his driver's license?
c. Where and when did he get the driver's license?
d. How many months, which period of the year, he was in the
drivers unit Unter-den-Linden?
e. Who were the people he had to drive, who gave the orders?
40.
a. In which year and month he was sent by the NSKK to Paris?
42. a. Which was the number and/or the name of the unit to which
David was detached at the French West Coast?
b. Where was the unit stationed?
c. Who was the commander of the unit? who were other superi-
-ors?
43. a. When was the NSKK unit asked to take an oath?
b. How did David refuse to take the oath (The procedure?)
c. How long, after his refusal, he was retained there before
he was returned to Earlin?
44. a. Which identity papers did David have with himself when
brought to the SA punitive camp?
b. which identity papers did he have when he went to the
Police Headquarters?.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_17.jpeg ---
14-0000
STANDARD
Office Men. andum
TU
Special Contracting Officer
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
DATE: 11 February 1960
FROM
Mr. David TZITZICHVILI
SUBJECT: Beneficiary, designation of
In accordance with the terms of my current affiliation with the
United States Government, it is my understanding that in addition to monthly
salary, onus and other benefits, I am entitled to five thousand dollars in
($5,000.) death benefits payable to a designated beneficiary, providing my
death occurs during the performance of my mission or as a direct result
thereof.
2. I therefore designate the following person as beneficiary to
receive the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.):
Colette. HOMERIKI
30 Rue Cabanis
Paris 14, France
'
Relationship: Friend
David Tzitzichvili
233477
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_168.jpeg ---
76. a
80
81
a
-322
Give as many names and addresses of people for whom you
prepared false documentation as you remember.
Have you prepared documents for mass-transportation ex
cept those for your parents and sister from Berlin to
Vienna?
Where
how many times, did you meet the Belgian girl?
Who of his friends or patrons had wisited his living place
a. Where did he meet ALLUMES on the morning when they brought
the unexploded bomb to his David s room?
82. a
68
92
How does he explain that the Belgian girl came to his
living place and found him injured?
Why had Allumes, Sterée and Katz to come to the railroad
station for David s meeting with the Pelgian girl?
the Belgian
When did the parents and the sister of David go from
Berlin to Vienna?
b. Which documents David had prepared for this move?
93. a. When and where was the meeting arranged between David
and his father?
b. Was there anybody present in the room during this meeting?
c.What kind of a room was this?
96. a. What has he told to the specialists about his invention?
b. What did the specialists find being acceptable theore-
tically?

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_167.jpeg ---
1400000
C. 45.
46
C
-31-
the the Felice asked and got on information about
David's previous employment?
What did David tell about his relations with the BSKX?
which hame addresses e gave in Paris and in Berlin?
d. Whom did he spoke in the Police HQ, and who issued him
the certificate which he brought to the S. camp?
(49)
48.
David has said that he had a room hired where he stood
during his duty-free time.)
When and where did you rented the private room for your
self?
what kind of a house this room was?
Who was the landlord or the landlady?
d. What was the rent?
with..
ead you registered the room your Police Unit?
f.For how long did you have this room
How often he had to show himself in the hospita, for re-
newal of his convalessence certificate?
b. Was there a stamp used when the certificate was renewed?
c. How many times he had "renewed" the certificate himself?
51. a. When and where (town, occasion) did David get acquinted
with Asterée. ?
i
b. Since when did Asterés know of his falcifications?
c. Since when did she help him in this? How did she help?
d. Where did he get the typewriter ?
(52)e. When was this certificate re "surgical operation" prepa-
red and used?
f. On haw many occasions did David use this certificate?
57. a. Where did he learn this trick with the two documents
presenting the false one first?
-
59. a. Sketch all the seals and stamps ALLCU has made for you.
60. a. Which documents you have supplied with filigree nets pre-
pared by youself? Where did you learn this?
b. Form-letters of which offices did you let be printed
through the intermediary of Allou?
70. a. Was WERWERT the real name of the man for whom you prepa-,
red a Spanish passport, or why was this name used?
t
b. Who was Werwert according to the passport you prepared
for him?
c. Did you photograph Werwert to get the necessary photo?
where did you do this?
d. Where did you get the necessary "visa" for the pass?
71. a. What was the name of the soldier in the switchboard of
the commandantura in Paris?
b. What was his address in Berlin?
c. Describe the family, give names, ages.
d. Describe their living place, or where you met the wife?
e. Were the soldier and his wife witting of their use?
!

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_171.jpeg ---
**
-35-
This love of excitement was not strong enough, just as was
not the political motivation, to bring him to more dangerous,
and more demanding acts. (C 4, 8; E 2.)
Besides, this longing for excitements has decreased with
the age when during the school age he did not care what his
parents felt when he was being thorun out of all schools, when
he caused brands, stole, was arrested by the police (B 6 19)
and when in 1939 he was bold enough to volunteer to the Foreign
legion, then, in later years, he is not so bold any longer, as
mentioned before, and he is held back by the thought of his
mother s and his wife's feelings. (E 5, 10.) He even needs the
repeated approaches of Jean Adamx, and coersion, to get over the
estraining influence of his wife
During the debriefing, although he was left in full freedom
to tell his story, to feel, to live it once more, he did not
show any excitement; he spoke as if telling the story of an other
person, leaving the impression of a man weary of his turbulent
past, possibly longing for the family ( he mentioned having
not seen his wife since 1950)..
3.. Láck of initiative.
His troubles in the schools seem having started when he
got acquainted with Jean ADAM whose plans he followed, although
he "was sure that he could have made better plans".( B 11.)
In Germany he had PASCAL who did not like the jobs, spoke
of leaving those, whereupon "they" then decided to flee. (C 6,22.)
Later Jean ADAM is back again with his bad ideas and in-
tentions, even blackmailing David into action. ( E 5, 11.)
Lack of planning.
He often acts under the effect of a momentary thought,
without planning, or he changes the plans if there were any.
Sometimes those acts or changes are just ridiculous, and
show how bad was the "planning" itself. (C 26, 30,34.)
Thereby he neglects the neccessary security precautions,
and takes unneccessary risks. (C 10, 13, 16, 17, 77, 78, 81, 84,
87, E 1.)
Sometimes, when his "plan" does not work, he gets lost and
remains inactive, lets things go their own way. (c°15.)

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_169.jpeg ---
D
a.
b
4
-33
AUDITIONAL QUESTIONS.
Where did you develope the negatives and films, and
where did you make the copies (the positices) and
enlargements?
Did the landlord/landlady know of all this?
Through whom did you give money to your father?
How much was this in which currency
c. When and where was this?
E
which hotel in Faris did you tria to register under
a false name, and what, exactly, was this name?
Did you have any documents on this name? which?
3. a. Where did you live in Paris before your parents returned
from Vienna?
b. The same question - after the parents returned from Vienna
4. a. Where, when, did David learn to know Renee Parrod?
b. Where did Renée live before they married?
c. Whom of Renée's relatives he knows and corresponds with?
d. The addresses of known relatives of Renée.
9. a. What was the name and address of the jevelry shop which
they ransaked?.
13. a.
a. How was the periscope concealed in the car?
b. Which type and year of make the car was?
15. a. In which bank they made the hold-up?
20. a. Give names of inmates and of supervisors he remembers
from the different jails he was hold.
b.
What did he learn on "techniques and tactics" of clan-
destine work in these jails?
Who were his most important teachers in those subjects?
23. List addresses where you lived after you were released from.
the prison, until you were contacted.
24. List jobs you have had during this period, giving addresses
character of job, salary earned, or income if selfemployed.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_170.jpeg ---
74-0000U
-34-
CHARACTERISTIC TRAITS IN HIS ACTIVITY.
Locational instability.
As a child he gets thrown out of six schools for having
done nonsense. (Ref. B 7,12,13,14,15,17.) *`.
Nor does he finish the last, the photography and movie
school, although he is about 21 years of age and should, thus,
be able to think for himself (B. 18.)
Instead,he volunteers into the French Foreign Legion, thus,
going in war against the Germans. (C 1.)
Later he volunteers for work in Germany, stays on jobs
3 to 4 months then flees the country (tvice ), and after a
few days out of Germany, volunteers again for work there,
all without any good, compelling reason. ( C 18,22; 39,40.)
a
The reasons for changing his jobs when in Germany or with
the Germans, and the situations in which he changes or
contemplates to change his jobs, are unreasonable, if not un-
believable. ("C 45, 77.)
2. Lack of motivation.
He thinks that during the school age it was the inferiority
complex that made him do nonsense: he wanted to show up despite
being small in growth and having a funny name, (B 7a, 16.)
He is not doing anything for material gain, he has done
none of his special activities for money, and he won't do this
in the future. (E 22).
He has no ideological motivation, neither patriotic, nor
enough political feelings: he does not feel being a Georgian,
he is not interested in the Georgian Throne, he has partly for-
gotten the Georgian language, and he wanted to register as a
Frenchman. (A 1; E 1.)
Although he "hates the Russians in General", and even more
the Soviet-Russians, this hatred was not strong enough to make
him join the German-sponsored Georgian anti-Soviet unit. (C 4,8.)
His longing for thrill and excitement, the single remaining
motivation, seems to be limited to the more-or-less comfortable,
physically easy activities, like forging of documents, and
fooling officials with those documents, playing a wise man who
acts according to his psychological tricks. (C 24,36,37,57; D 6.)
"

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_172.jpeg ---
2.
H:
-36-
RELIABILITY OF THE STORY
His story gets unbelievable because too often
he has "good luck" which helps him (C 15,16,27,30,78,a.o.),
his opponent is stupidly derelict, which enables David always
to come out a winner to escape the danger of being captured.
( C 10,23,23,29,36,37,44,45,52,58,77.)
There are statements in his story which are not well
believable,
->
-
that he and Pascal got leave- or travel-documents from the
Police in Stettin without having had any leave certificate from
the factory, or that he, having been only for a few months in
Germany, knew the language well enough and could prepare forged
leave certificates for himself and Pascal. (C 7.)
A
that he does not remember where he did live in Berlin when
employed as a photographer, when this place was searched. (C 18)
that "Passports for Foreigners" were issued by the German au-
thorities so easily, without any checks, on so lomited purpose
as was theirs: only for a short leave in Paris. (C 25, 29.)
His tutoring of Pascal concerning the map this was not necessary
at all, because it really was him, David, who bought the map,
Pascal could not have stated wrongly. ( C 28.).
- that he was allowed to go from the NSKK penal camp to Police
Haj
that the Police engaged him without any investigation of
his past;B that the NSKK penal camp released him simply on the
basis of a note that he had registered for work with the Police.
(C44-46.).
that he, at this time, knew the trick with the combination of
a false and a true document, ( C 57.) and
-
that the higher an officer, the easier is to fool him (D 6),
that one has to use the "lack of link" between different
authorities: to present afforged) document of one authority
to an officer of an other authority, who would not find
the forging. (This was mentioned in connection with D 6.)
that the officer in OKW ABW gave him the top-secret location
of the installation without having asked for the purpose of
his visit. (C 77.)
that he was so security conscious and did not meet the patrons
in his living place, that the "Belgian girl", Allumes and oth-
ers had not been to this place before. (C 80,81,82.)
that he had ordered through Allou forged letter-forms
of different offices by thousands of copies. (60).
"
i

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_173.jpeg ---
J
-37-
SECURITY RISK
Whether the story is right or invented, or "beautified"
there are points in it which indicate to some security risks
connected with this person:
2.
His father, sister, her husband, and probably their children,
1948.(A3)
are in the USSR where to they repatriated from France in 1948. (A3)
-
His father, although a theoretical "pretender to the Throne
and so well trusted by,
of Georgia" is in so good relation with
the communists government of the USSR and of Soviet Georgia
that he is allowed to live permanently (over 10 years
Georgia. (A 3.)
in Tiflis
His cousin Mathee Keresselidze, who was sent by the Ger-
mans as a spy to USSR, was caught there, and sentenced to 15 years
in prison or hard labor, was later free to come to Moscow and to
repatriate to France A 7.)
.5. His sister Helen, after she repatriated, was used by the
communists as a teacher of languages in Georgia. Then, convicted
for insulting talk about Stalin, and sentenced to 5 years in a
detention area, she was later vindicated, received retroactively
the salary for those five years, was allowed to come back to
Tiflis, was occasionally at the same time in Moscow when Mathée
was there, and they, occasionally, met there. ( A 5.)
.6.
Helen's husband Irakli Lordkipanidze, a former German SD.
man, repatriated to USSR together with his wife. (See p.l above.).
However, Mathé shall allegedly having heard nothing about his
fathe when he met Helen in Moscow. (A 7.)
7.
Such things happen sometimes, but they are far from belon-
ging to everyday's pattern in Soviet life. The concentration of
all those happenings on a very limited circle of David's relatives
could hardly be occasional. This should have special reasons.
8.
The question arises: If this concentration is not occasio-
nal, then what is its purpose or reason, and how much is David
involved?
9.
-
Concerning David himself:
a/ According to this story he has acted in so many cases im-
prudently, just relaying on his "good luck" only, and the stupi-
dity of his opponents, that this could have developed into a
habit of his.
b/ He has spoken of having been very cautious and security
minded when taking people to his living place (that only two
friends have been there), and when meeting people. (C 80.)
Eut
TEL. – 1
I
[13] ***

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_175.jpeg ---
15
1 2
.
-39-
in his own. a better, perhaps less straining, easier way.
In his eyes this does not need to be urhonest, because the
boss knows that he is a crock a honest, but clever one
c/ If this analysis is right, then this hypothetical case of
"honest" David is mooving along the road of a wise man s work
which David likes to go: not too dangerous and straining pay-
sically, however, well exciting.
d/ If, however, David is a double agent, then he would not need
any of the found traits in his past activity and his way to
the other side is simple, provided that he will not be detected
here before
1.
K. SUGGESTED NEXT STEPS.
To avaid possible errors, the following steps are suggested:
A cross-check of all debriefing reports and other informa-
tion available on David.
2. Drafting a list of additional fact-finding and control ques-
tions.
3. Asking these questions under simultaneous application of
consealed tape recording, thus providing an opportunity for
detailed study of the answers and reactions of David.
4. Secret checks on persons mentioned in David's story, espe-
cially on Mathée Keresselidze..
:
5. Secret checks with the French authorities on the last 10
years of David's whereabouts, activities and contacts, in-
cluding the time in jails.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_174.jpeg ---
14-00000
-38-
But he, probably, has rot thought of how dangerous it was for
him to re-register two times in Paris under his right name for
re-employment in Germany after he had abandoned there two working
places. or has he thought how dangerous it was for him to visit
his parents or those occasions in Faris, at the addresses on
which he might have been wanted, while these addresses, probably,
were registered as his home addresses when he applied for work
in Germany.
David has shown during the debriefing broad knowledge of
different advanced techniques and tactics of clandestine work.
which he claims having used If believing his story, then the
question arises where could he have learned all this knowledge
at that early time, before 1944?
a The incident of having instructed Pascal through the cellar
wall what to say during the interrogation about the map, with no
at
other items mentioned on what more he had instructed Pascal a
the same occasion, makes one think that this part of the story
is invented. It looks that David had been told of such pre-
coordination of testimonies, that he had not quite understood
the matter, and - relying on his "intelligence", was telling
nonsense. (C 23 and H 2, related item.)
e/
David's acclaimed broad knowledge of different "psychologi-
cal" tricks on one side, and on the other side his unwittingly
demonstrated lack of understanding of many basic principles of
clandestine work, leave the impression that David has heard of
most of those clever things after he had used his primitive
knowledge during WW II, and is simply trying to impress us by
telling "clever" stories. This would be in line with his need
of showing up. ( G 2; E 7a, 16.)
:
f/ This could be true if he still is a "honest" crook, and
the story is right in its main lines.
However, the too tight concentration of events, different infor-
mation and alleged knowledge in this story, together with the
unexcited, unpartial way of telling the exciting story by David,
give also reason to think that the story is a "too good" cover-
story of a penetration agent.
10. What could happen when David, being taken for a"honest
crook", would be used in a clandestine operation?
a/ Due to his general instabilty and the trend to act under the
effect of some momentary thought, he might easily deviate of the
pre-arranged, secure plan of action, and may fall into difficul-
ties through his irrational steps.
b/ Due to the lack of solid, binding motivation, and the trend
to use his own "cleverness", he may "somehow" come to the splendid
idea of contacting the "other side" and carry out the assignment

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
J. M. MCHENRY
MANAGER
A
THE CHESAPEAKE AND POTOMAC TELEPHONE COMPANY
930 H STREET, NORTHWEST
WASHINGTON 1. D. C
February 10, 1960
TELEPHONE
METROPOLITAN 7-9900
Mr. David Durvard
116419th Street,
Washington, D.C.
Dear Mr. Durvard:
In order to provide adequate telephone service in your
vicinity, it has become necessary for us to make certain rearrange-
ments of telephone equipment. These rearrangements will result in
some changes of subscribers' telephone numbers.
affected.
We sincerely regret that your telephone is among those
The change will take place during April, 1960, and your
new telephone number will be Federal 8-1263
Before the
e of our representatives will call on you and
per card on your telephone..
Come's new
ffice #is
Futeral 8-1263
Capt. # is not
Changid
request, of course, your telephone number does.
Directory. However, to cause you minimum incon-
refer all of your calls from the old number to
• a reasonable period of time. If you should not
ince, please call our Business Office.
ou for your understanding and cooperation.
Cordially,
mm Harry
J.M.
Manager
t
i
i
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_2.jpeg ---
14:00000
A
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FORS Chief, Os/Alien Affairs Staff
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
REFERENCES
r. Pemington
ST/DOD/60-1911
22 March 1960
Extension of Time in 1 for ISOI Agent AEASPIC
CI/04 No. C-73532.
SE/DOB Memorandum 1163, dated 12 March 1959.
SR/DUB Namorandum 1730, dated 14 September 1959.
It is requested that an extension of time be arranged through
your office to allow DSO agent ALASPIC, who entered this country
HEDSOI
(black) 20 April 1959, to remain in the United States until about
20 April 1961. It is not envisaged that Subject will be required to
remain in 21 throughout this entire period; however, such an extersion
vill fford adequate time for implementation of operation ALSENTINEL.
2. Close supervision as regards personal and social contacts of
ABASPIC will, of course, bo continued by an SR/DOB staff officer,
until such time as Subject re-enters training when his status will
revert to that as outlined in Reference a. (supervision by a staff
officer on a 24-hour basis).
3. Subject is available at the convenience of your office
should his visits to Immigration and Naturalisation Offices be deemed
Decessary to effect this arrangement.
4. For any further information please contact Fred Kirkpatrick
on Ext. 8331.
:
Distribution:
Orig & 1
-
addressee
1 - 201 file
1 - SR/DOB chrono
SECRET
=
MICHAEL RAE
Chief, SH/DOB
233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_176.jpeg ---
14-00000
-40
PERSONAL DMPRESSION
MADE BY DAVID ON THE DEBRIEFER.
Soon after the second session of the debriefing, on 29 Apr,
the debriefer was asked by the assigner whether the debriefer,
if he were in the situation of an agent to go together with David
on a clandestine operation, replied:
2.
NO, there is no rely on this man.
This reply stands at this day of closing of this reports.
a/ it is dangerous to go with him, even if warned that he is
or might be a double-agent, and when, thus, prepared for the
resulting special dangers
he may add many more, unpredictable dangers by his irra-
tional, flash-of-thought actions.
b/ it is s
still more dangerous to go with him if knowing his
weaknesses, however taking him for a "honest" crook. No
matter whether he be boss or subordinate, one can not rely
on his adherence to the prepared plan and given orders.
'
-
c/ It is suicidal (unwittingly, of course) for a person who
would be sent with him without being informed of his weak
nesses, in full trust of his knowledges experience, ratio-
nality and all other necessary qualities which he does not have
3.
Despite of this rather negative impression, it must be
said that David could still prove to be a satisfactory performer,
and an acceptable calculated risk on many one-man special opē-
rations, this especially in view of the rather general shortage
of "excellent" stock of candidates.
251-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_19.jpeg ---
147 10000
:
The cover address of the establishment for David's employment:
Fred K. Komer (employer)
290 Concord Unive
River Edge, New Jersey
;

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR: 52/DCB Finance Office
SEDJECT
Request for Operational Advance.
18 January 1960
Safehouse Branch/CL has requested the remaining four
hs rent in advance for the living quarters of a SENTINEL agent,
AFASFIC. Under the stipulations of the agreement with the agent,
this rent is to be paid by AEASPIC. The terms of the lease specify
147.50 a month payable on the 1st. day cổ the month. The lease
began 1 November 1959, and will run until 30 June 1960, a period
of eight months. The first four months rent ($590.00 for November
thru February) have been paid from money credited to ASASPIC.
2 Fred Kirkpatrick, SA/DOB Case Officer will drew on
advance from SRB Finance of $590.00 for the four remaining
months rent. This sun will be deducted from AEASPIC's monthly
salary (1.6. 3147.50 a month for the period Harch thru June 1960).
AFFROV Di
Chief, SRGB
FREE KIRKPATNICK

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
DATE
TO
FROM
047 00/15/11
ACTION: SR 6
INFO
22 JAN 60
DIRECTOR
SAO PAULO
CI, CI/CPS, FI, WH 4, S/C 2
SSIFIED MESSAGE.
SECRE
TO
DIR.
ROUTING
3.
10123 CS 4380
SECT.
ROUTINE
IN 32458
INFO
RIOD POUCH
.CITE.
SAOP 1120
REDWOOD AEACRE
REF. HBPW 2721
BASE WOULD LIKE TO GIVE UP POST OFFICE BOX 11734 NOT
LATER THAN 15 FEB.
2. INSTRUCT AGENT SOONEST TO USE FOLL ADDRESS IN FUTURE:
ANY NAME, CAHXA (ALSO RVCD CAXXA) POSTAL 11744 (LAPA) SAO
PAULO BRAZIL.
END OF MESSAGE
Fred-
J form
in turn
ild
David
20
what he might
live infuse his friends who have the
address.
Day
i
SECRET.
25 JAN 1960
miR
201.233477
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
Copy No.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_22.jpeg ---
2000
#
SECHET
SP/DOB/60/
14 January 1960
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Alion Affairs Staff
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
Fennington
Personal Status of SR/DCS Agent
AEASPIC (David DURVARD)
Please be advised that SF/DUB Agent, APIC, is being
closely supervised by SR/DCB as regards to his personal and
social contacts
2. He is at present residing in a washington, D.C. apartment
under the name David Durvard. This apartment was obtained by
Safehouse Branch and fully approved and checked by the office of
Security.
3. Safehouse Branch has also obtained an office some five
blocks from his living quarters. This office site has also
been approved and checked by the office of Security. AFASPIC
is at present engaged in his office, doing unclassified work
to keep him occupied. He is being visited, by an SR/DOB Case
Officer, on a regular weekly basis (and/or as the necessity
arises).
FK/vat
Distribution'
Orig & 1 - Addressee
41
-
Subj's. File
1 - Chrono
MICHAEL RAB
Chief, Sa/DCB
01233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
SB/DB/59/53
8. December 1959
MENOPA KUUM FOR: Office of Communications
SUBJECT
brok
Evaluation of Code of SE/DOB REDSOI Agant
It is requested that the attached encoded
and the code wh
represents evaluated.
This code represents the attempt of a REDSOI agent to
formilate
ate a worthwhile method of cryptography.
hoped that this code will prove of some interest to the office
It is therefore
Communications
of
3. The following details are furnished concerning the encoded
Ressage:
The message will be in the English language.
The key to the code is contained in the text of
1.
the encoded message.
4. It would be appreciated if a cryptographer or other
representative of your office could interview subject agent,
provided his code indicates he has an aptitude for this work.
5. For further information, please contact Mr. Fred Kirkpatrick
on Ext. 8331.
Att. - message
PC/89
Distribi
041- add. w/1 copy of att.
1
->>
SR/003 w/o *
1
->
SR/DCB chrono
MICHAEL RAB
Chief, SR/DOB

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_25.jpeg ---
14-00000
Paridave carchelew to fe
e had these de up on
on his omn
is own as a means
on 16 December 1959.
Centification
DAVID DURVARD ·
TECHNICAL ADVISOR
ENGINEER
POTOMAC MOUSE
940 35TH STREET, M.
WARMINGTON, DC.
7-635
2013233417
P

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
ATTH:
Chief, BR/DOR
Mr. Edward H. Sanner, Jr.
Chief, Safehouse Branch/OL
SECRET
November 1959
Safehouse No. 297 Req #59-23 CCD # SH-143
SSD #206920
59-23) routed to us
the property
per requir
requirements
ts set
Requisition: Your request for a domestic safehouse (Req.
vie the Central Cover Division (CCD BH-143) has been
the marner herein described. Said property to be utilized
forth in the requisition has been approved by the Office of Security (88D 206920).
J.M
Property: A furnished efficiency apartment located at 940 25th Street, N.
Apt. 202, Washington, D. C.
Lessor: John Safer Management Co.
Lessee: Mr. Powell Browning, Jr. a Security-cleared attorney-at-lev with offices
located at 3145 N. Street, W., Washington, D. C. Office Telephone FE 3-5081.
By virtue of a Memorandum of Agreement, exclusive rights of tenancy has been assigned
to the Agency. Accordingly, Mr. Browning is the nominal lessee while indirectly the
Agency is the actual lessee and responsible for full and strict compliance with the
terms of the lease. Questions or problems involving relationships of the lesses
cut-out and the lessor, neighbors, police, et al will be handled through the lessee
cut-out (Mr. Browning) acting under the control and direction of the Safehouse Branch.
Terms of the lease are
The lease begins 1 Novembar
Lenal lease is on file in the Safehouse Branch.
$147.50 per month payable on the 1st day of the month.
and runs until 30 June 1960, a period of 8 months.
;
Cover Story: Mr. Powell Browning, the lessee cut-out, has ostensibly leased the
apartment in order to assist a foreign client to obtain housing because of the mane
language difficulty and in his inability to comprehend the provisions of a lease.
Mr. Browning has therefore signed the lease in the clients behalf.
Case Officer: Mr. Edward H. Sanner, Jr., Ext. 8331.
Financial Arrangements: Rent, utilities, stoleptone carice will be paid by the
lesses cut-out, Mr. Browning. Any unusual or abnormal matters properly belonging
or chargeable to the lessee should be taken up with and approved by the Barehouse
Branch.
Pursuant to the stipulations of R:45-1025, the financial ocemitments of the
lease were approved by the Chief, Real Estate Construction Division/OL. In
compliance with arrangements made between the stroller and the Director of Logistics
ve have advised the former regarding this acquisition.
Distribution:
Orig. & 1 hddressee
->
1
-.
CCD/NC
SSD/08 1 SH File 297
KALTOR C. CARROLL

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_28.jpeg ---
14.00000
SECRET
CERTIFICATE
6 November 1959
This is to certify that I, David TZITZICHVILI, fully understand,
and agree to abide by, all provisions concerning the change in my persona
status and release from 24-hour custody as explained to me this date.
Primary restrictions are as follow:
The use only of David DURVARD identity
Travel restrictions limited to Washington D.C. area
Obtaining or attempting to obtain a driver's permit
Purchase, directly or indirectly, of an automobile
Obtaining or using any charge or credit purchase plan
Room-mates (Not to include visitors)
Any illegal activity
I fully understand that the provisions of my current contract with.
the United States Government and the provisions of the Secrecy Agreement
which I have signed are both still applicable, and will remain so during
the period 6 November 1959 to 1 July 1960 or until cancelled by the
United States Government..
I furthe: understand that any violation of the instructions which I
have received, either verbal or written, will be just cause for the
termination of my contract and such further action as may be deemed
appropriate by my superiors.
WITNESS:
Dudd
SECRET
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
10 Chief of Base, São Paulo
INFO
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, Rio de Janeiro
Chief, SR
REDVOLD/AFACRE
Servicing occommodation address
ACTION REQUIRED
See Paragraph 2 below
REFERENCE(S).
DIR 45223, 21 September 1959
FBPA-3747, 12 October 1959
DATE
HBFH-2021
JARTE 25 FILE:
201-233477
T
433″ – (CHECK “K”¨¨ONE)
MARKED FOR INDEXING",
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
INDEXING CAN BE JUDGED:
BY QUALIFIED HQ DESK ONLY
ference
is for use by an aɛ
his return
date he has
he has writte
postal address
itten three letters, diving
Subject has indicated he does
does not anticipate volumino
correspondance; however, such answers ho does eceive vi
through
Adres
week
addres
Distribution:
(3 nov 59)
2 - 009, Sao Falo
1 - COS, Rio de Janeiro
2 - WH
1- WH Mailroom
RE
1 - SR/10 Attn: Lois Oglo
V2 - 8R/DOB
Chrono
Therefore, it is requested
conveniently possible
GEORGE F. LIPSIUS
J01-233477
CLASSIFICATION
LS PREVIOUS EDITION
MAKING.
$3
1. AND
soum
☐

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_27.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEC
MINORANDUM FOR: Contract Pesonnel Division
SUBJECT
VIROGUR/1
1 Contract (Formerly ARABPIC)
NOV 196
revio
20
Inning 20 &
ubje
WEROGUE/1 file shoved
oved that subjec
1959 through 30
ince
contrect for
dato unt 11
21 Octob
1960
Divia
picked
ing to at
20.
190
unsted
rect
to cate
following points
ctive date: 21. How
1950 throu
hrough 20
20 Boves
B:
Compensation: $500
Las $3000 per
for housing
C.
Medical: to extent it is
essary to maintain good
of health.
D. Insurance: $5000 payable to beneficiary.
E. Bonus: for outstanding performance, resettlement in another country.
F. Termination: ending of all benefits and montes.
3. This contract will have to be prepared for signing prior to 18 Bovember
1960.
4. For further information, please contact Mr. Daniel R. Hiesciur, X8284.
(Sighted) Clean D. Fields
Glenn D. Fields
Acting Chief, Africa Division
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
TI---
MAN
.
SEGRET
March 1950
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
Status Report
In November 1959 Cover Branch assisted SR/DOB Case Officer
Fred Kirkpatrick in formulating cover under which AESENTINEL agent
AEASPIC could live and thus be released from 24-hour custody.
AEASPIC was documented under the name David Durvard and was so
registered by Alier. Affairs Staff AEASPIC carries a cover letter
issued by Alien Affairs to this effect.
SR/DOB Case Officer Fred Kirkpatrick was documented (see below)
under the name Fred K. Komer, a self-employed manufacturers repre-
sentative, presently engaged, with David Durvard, in adapting
certain American automatic coin-operated vending machines to the
French market, in particular in the Paris area. Mr. Durvard is
serving as Mr. Koner's engineer/technical advisor.
This arrangement has to date worked entirely satisfactorily,
and it is hoped will continue to function until about mid June, when
aforementioned cover arrangement should be discontinued owing to
resumption of operational training. Fur further information, please
contact Fred Kirkpatrick on Ext. 8331.
1. New York driver's license No. 3068221, Aug. 13, 1957
issued in the name of Fred Karl Komer, 290 Concord Dr.,
River Edge, N.J.
2. Social Security No. 056-04-2165 issued in the name of Fred Karl Komer
3. United States Fidelity and Guaranty Company, Balt., Md., issued
in the name of Fred Karl Nomer, 290 Concord Dr., River Edge, N.J.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_29.jpeg ---
1-00000.
1
2.
82/205
To
Sa/10
ROOM
DATE
NO.
RECEIVED
NOV
1959
BR/COP/SI
5.
N
NOY
195
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
195.15
Selme
WH/2
WA Regusty
NOV
91959
1959.
2/11/8
34
10 100
ROY
10.
12
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
RI/DP
:
10/11 24.10.
RECORD COPY
COORDINATING OFFICERS
NAME.
OFFICE
#1
Chief, SA/10
SR/CCP/FT
Julle Cantly 28/268/20
u above 1/2
ENCLOSURE
ABSTRACT
INDEX
OATE MICROFILMED
FORM
3-58 6106
"TRITZIMIVILI, DAVID
TITLE
Chief, SH/DCP
AUTHENICATING OFFICER
NAME
Michael
R.D
FILE NUMBER
Rai
RELEASING OFFICER
NAME.
201-233':77
DOCUMENT DATE
3 Nove
SECRET
TITLE
Chief, WH
DOCUMENT NUMBER
HERM-2021
(40)

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
DISPATCH
Chief of Base, Sao Paulo
Chief of Station Rio de Janeiro
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief SR
REDWOOD/AZACRE
Servicing accommodation address
ACTION REQUIRED
REFERENCES)
See Paragraph 2 balar
DIR 45223, 21 September 1959
HEPA-3747, 12 October 1959
SECRET
HBP-2021
HEADQUARTERS FLE, NO.
DATE
201-233477
CNE)
MARKED FOR INDELING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
DODUNG CẦN BỊ UDGED
BY QUALIFIED HG). DESK ONLY“
outlined in reference
postal address requested
is for use by an agent. To date he has written three letters, giving
this as his return address
Subject has indicated he does not anticipate voluminous
correspondence; however, auch answers as he does receive will cons
through this accomodi ian address. Therefore, it is requested the
ddress be serviced often as is conveniently possible and at least
wock
Distributions
2 - COB, Sao Paulo
1 - COS, Rio de Janeiro
2 WH
1 - WH Hailroon
1
->
RI
S/10 Attn: Lois Ogle
2 - SR/DOB
l
Chrono
FORM
10-57 53
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
REPLACES FORMS *
51:25, 51-28A ANO.57:29
WHICH ARE OBSOLETE.
GEORGE F. LIPSIUS
NTINUED
201-233477
SECHET
GLASSIFICATION
CONTINUE
MART

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_32.jpeg ---
14-00000
H
udery
sevjorya Assigrad
DAVID DURVARD
ALC Assigne
tom Assigmænd
Ject or Agent
Button
9 MONTH HOLDING.
REBLOR FOR AGENT.
3. Status (Staff Employees Stuff, Contract, or Fløid Agentz otcij
Contract Agent
SA/DOB CENT
PERRY CROONNAMY S
00
To be used in cable traffi(year;
To
Fi
Type of Activitys
No
Llet any parutains or crypting jewica AEASPic
Do asolans
C
NATION
Trun
Project scription
: David Tzitzichivili.
A
Jor.233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
World's 2014
better Sintall
the same time
23 October 1959
Dear Paul
Enclosed are two more of David's letters to be forwarded by
you.
These are both dated 26 October so please post
that date.
or after
Thankm again for this convenience.
Sincerely,
211:233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_33.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
:
The United States Government, as represented by the Contracting
Officer, hereby amends the initial contract accepted by you in April 1959,
to include the following provisions for the period 20 September 1959 through
30 June 1960. During the period of time as indicated, you will be required
to perform such duties as may be assigned you by your superiors. All such
duties, whether of a research nature or otherwise, will be considered to be
of a confidential nature. The terms and conditions of your amended contract
are as follow:
1. Compensation
In consideration of the satisfactory completion of such duties
as may be assigned you, you will be paid $400.00 monthly.
2.
Bonus
Due to the nature of the assignments which will be given you
to perform, no bonus will be considered.
3. Medical
-
You will be provided such medical or dental treatment as may be
considered necessary to maintain your physical fitness and permit the
accomplishment of your assignments. Periods of hospitalization will necessita
the suspension of salary for the duration of said hospitalization.
4. Insurance
+
You will be insured for the amount of $5,000.00 payable upon
death to a beneficiary designated by you, provided your death occurs while
in the performance of duty.
5. Termination
If for any reason traceable to you, such as making yourself
unavailable for proper performance of duty, you fail to consumate the terms
of our understanding by not attempting to perform your assigned duties,
your salary will be immediately terminated and you will be resettled in a
place to be decided by your superiors, without further compensation or
assistance.
6. Secrecy Clause
You will be required to keep forever secret the contract and
all information which you may obtain by reason hereof (unless released in
writing by the Government from such obligation), with full knowledge that
violation of such secrecy may subject you to criminal prosecution under the
Espionage Laws dated 25 June 1948, as amended, and other applicable laws and
regulations.
7. Term of
Contract
The foregoing amendment to your initial contract is for the
period as specified, after which the terms of your initial contract will
again apply.
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
BY
Contracting Officer
ACCEPTED:
Dan
WITNESS:
APPROVED
A-1 Cost
H
201.233477
1

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_34.jpeg ---
gover
4-00000
The United States Government, as represented by the Contracting
Officer, hereby contracts with you for the submission of certain information
and related directed services of a confidential nature under the following
terms and conditions:
1. Can pensation
In consideration of the submission of such infor-
mation and related directed services, you will be paid $500.00 per month
until the activity is completed, a period to approximate 6 months. Of this
amount:
$450.00 per month tɔ be held in escrow pending your departure to
and return from such activity.
$50.00 per month to be paid directly to you for personal expenses
2 Bonus. A bonus to be paid contingent upon the comparative success
of the mission, the amount of the bonus to be determined at a later date by
the Contracting Officer, if the Contractee is chosen to perform the task assigned,
3. Termination. In the event the United States Government terminates
this activity or your connection with same, sooner than originally proposed,
through no fault of yours, you will receive all monies held in escrow and a
satisfactory resettlement will be effected as per prior oral agreement with
the United States Governinent.
However, if for any reason traceable to you, such as making yourself
unavailable for proper services or training, you fail to consummate the terma
of our understanding, you will not receive monies held in escrow, your salary
will be immediately terminated and you will be resettled in a place in accordance
with above mentioned prior agreement without further compensation or assistance.
4. Secrecy Clause. You will be required to keep forever secret the
contract and all information which you may obtain by reason hereof (unless
released in writing by the Government from such obligation), with full know-
ledge that violation of such secrecy may subject you to criminal prosecution
under the Espionage Laws dated 25 June 1948, as amended, and other applic-
able laws and regulations.
ACCEPTED:
WITNESS:
APPROVED:
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
BY
Contracting Officer
208
235477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_31.jpeg ---
100000
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Alim Affairs Staff, OS
ATTFETICH
SUBJECT
Pr. Pannington
AASPIC, CI/OA No. 73532
(Local Address)
S/LOB/59/178
November 1959
The local address of the Subject to be furnished the Immigration
and Naturalization Service for use on his documentation in lieu
passport is
follows:
940 25th Street N.W.
Apt. 202
Washington, D.C.
OHT/vat
Distribution:
Orig & 1 - Addressee
2
I
-
-
DOB Security
Chrono
MICHAEL RAK
Chief, SR/DCB
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_37.jpeg ---
14-00000
As far as "hers" are concerned, you know that I still have a pic-
ture of my Flack (moreover, it's my only family album) but she must
have changed and must be a happy mother of many children, bitch that
she was.
T
I kiss you all and expect a letter
rom you
[signed]
P.S. This is my address. Since I'm often away, take care to
copy it correctly; your letter will be forwarded.
Tavis quasklet
c/o Jan Pilsudski
Colm Fostal 1174 (1)
Sao Paulo, PRAZIL
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
15 March 1960
Extension of time granted for AESENTINEL agent AEASPIC whereby subject
ay remain legally (Immigration/Naturalization cognizant) until 20
October 1960. This information relayed to SP/DCB by Allen Affairs
Stari representative ir. Pennington.
T
FRED KIRKPATRICK, SP/DOB
:
201-233477
Ti

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_36.jpeg ---
1-4-00000
Sao Paulo
23 October 1959
Dear Atchico.
I've
begin. I can linking for an hour and I still don't
know how to
say that as a brother I've es
brother I've especially been
been a blessing
to you and ofter I've caused you more trouble than would have liked,
directly or indirectly. My leaving Cap was inevitable. On the one
hand because
ecause of the obligation to remain there until an indefinite
date, and above all because of the work I'm now doing which had been in
the offing for quite a while.
a while. My stay at Ambert had nothing to do with
departure; it was only a business trip.
Lor
Now
be
If I had been able to write you sooner I would have done so
I can, and as there are many things in suspense I would be glad
able to take them up where I've left them. I never expected you to bear
the price of my actions; therefore, I'm counting on you to tell me whom
you paid for me, for I presume that
for I presume that most people immediately thought you
were responsible for my debts. As soon as you reply, I will immediately
send you the money to reimburse you, or, if need be, to pay the inter-
ested party.
L
If you didn't already know, I'm notifying you that Jacqueline is
first on and there is no reason why she should be deprived of
my list
what is hers I could very well have sent her the money today, but I
don't
ven know if this letter will arrive at the right address.
more than a year since I left you, and I'm making contact again.
It's
Lis-
Next on the list ther's you naturally, whom I do not forget.
ten 1, what I ask is that you wrtie me seriously, for your sake as well
as mine. Give me the list of these people in order of urgency.
When I left Ambert, I had left instructions to pay certain people,
and I don't know if this has been done. I'm going to write to the
Dassauds, in this way, perhaps, I'll know what has happened.
I've been here a very short time and have had a lot to do in the
past few months. Unfortunately I can't tell you where, when, or what
kind of work. I only ask that you have faith in me.
How is life at Gap? How are the girls, Elico and Irene? I would
be glad to receive a letter from them with a few pictures of all of
you, if possible. Many regards to Jacqueline with hopes that she and
hers are all well.
:
2233477
s

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_39.jpeg ---
14-00000
[
his tres bien pu lui envoyer son argent aujourd'hui,
ras 61 cette lettre arrivera
mais je
la
bonne adresse.Cela fait plus d'un an que je vous al quitte
alors je reprends contact.
Ensuite sur la liste ily tof naturellement que
'oublie pas.Ecoute moi, ce que je te demande c'est de
'ecrire serieuseme pour toi comme pour moi. Tu me donnes
liste de
cens Cans l'ordre d'urgence
Quand j'ai quitte Ambert, j'avais laisse des ins-
certati personnes
tructions pour re
pas 81 cola a
it'
je ne
is ecrire aux Dassaud, ainsi
peut-etre saurais-je ou en sont les choses.
Je suis isf depuls tres peu de temps et j'eu
beauroup a faire tous ces mois-ci, malnoureusement je ne
peux ni t'expliquer. ou quand et quelle sorte de travail.
Je to demande simplement de me faire confiance.
Comment va la vie a Gap ? Comment vont les filles,
Elico et Irene Je serais bien content de recevoir une
lettre d'elles avec quelques photos de vous tous si cela
est possible.Bien des choses a Jacqueline en esperant
qu'elle va bien,ainsi que les siens.
A propos da''sions'', tu sate que af toujours une
photo de ma Plack 'est Hailleurs tout mon album de famille)
mais elle du changer et doit etre une heureuse maman de
beaucoup d'enfants, cochonne comme elle etait.
David de Pansaknet
c/ Jan Pilsuisci
vous embrasse tous bien fort et attends une lettre
Caixa Postal 11'34 (Lapa)
Sao Paulo, BRASIL
de vous.
P.S. Ceci est mon adresse.Etant tres souvent
en deplacement, ayes soin de la recopier tres
correctement; On transmettre.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_40.jpeg ---
1450000
17
Monsieur A. De PANASKHET
Architecte
I bis, Avenue Bellevue (Lablacne.
GA P
-Hautes A.pė
=
7.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_38.jpeg ---
4-00000
Sao Paulo octobre 1959
Mon cher vieux Atchico
Voila une heure que je tourne autour du pot
Je ne sais pas encore par quel bout commencer. Je ne
peux pas dire que j'ai été pour toi specialement une
benediction de frere, et souvent le t'ai cause des
mordemenbs plus que
urtis jamais voulu t'en
directement ou indirectement.M
rt de Jap lovait
produire inevitablemen
re
la con-
trainte d'y sojourner, jusqu
38
eterminee, et
surtout en raison du trava!! Q
- auis en train de faire
qui etait prévu depuis longtemps Mon Bejour a Ambert n'a
rien a voir avec mon depart,ca n'etait simplement qu'un
deplacement d'affaires..
al
r
31 j'avais pu t'ecrire plus tot, je l'aurais
falt.Aujourd'hui s'est possible.et comme il reste beau-
coat de choses en suspend je servis neureux de pouvoir
les reprendre là où je les ai laisseos.Je m'ai jamais
tenu à ce que tu supportes le prix de mes actes, aussi
Je compte sur to! pour mé dire qui a tu pays pour moi,
car je suppose que la majorite des gens ont immediatement
pense que tu étais responsable de mes dettes. Des que tu
me repondras, je te feral parvenir immediatement de l'argent
pour te rembourser, ou eventuellement payer l'interesse
I,
Si tu ne le savais pas je t'avise que Jacqueline
est la premiere taxe sur ma liste et il n'y a aucune
raison pour qu'elle soit privée de ce qui lui appartient.
201.23347.7
_
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
Sac Failo
20 October 1959
Dear Kathela and Lesis,
worn n cut by a lon
leagues under the sea,
land.
tries:
trip .... signed
A
as many in the
PELICA Twenty thousand
and here I am in cha-cha-cha
io (see Francis Carco) is a magnificent city. Princinal indus-
pleasure and love. If I were a prazilian would have called
this cit Loveland, (the French name is somewhat more eartily) this is,
pertais, less poetic than Fio de Janeiro cut more in the spirit of
things Louis would quickly make a forture curin the flourishing
cases of clap (vilgar French expression) and other little venereal
cetails.
I'll be here for some time. I have a bit of work to finish in
this country, on the order of hide and go seek. This is bound to take
me a few weeks if not a few months. After that I think I'll be able
to pay you a very short visit.
For the time being I am in Sao Paulo which is a city even more
magnificent than Ho, and also larger. In the movies you see Burt
Lancaster and Brigitte Bardot speak a pure Portuguese. Sometime ago,
they spoke derman flawlessly?
Here I ar burdened with a new language. It is very much like
Spanish and I think I get used to it rather quickly, but everthing.
is beginning to get mixed up: English, German, Russian, French
Georgian, and Spanish. Long live Esperanto! If someday I go to China,
I've had it
Now you have a vague idea of what I've done unto now, and, be-
sides, I'm not supposed to give my life's history.
.
I often think it would be good to see each other again to laugh
a little and to take some happy trips around Marseilles.
How are you
and How are the girls? Elice, Irene, and Cathy. I would love to
have a line from each of them if their pen isn't too heavy. It's
over a year since I've seen them. at the game time. I'm writing to
atchice, so that if Atchico were to hear the girls speaking of me
here he will not he exbarrasseder surprise. I'm thinking that now
they have an American uncle. Mat's good. However I haven't got 2
ranch pet, and beside, even if I had the possibility to get crie, it
wouldn't termt me.
20 238477
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_42.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
and
How is Zouquette?
s
so tell her that
And Sophie? I hope that still see
you her
would really be has to get a few lines
from her, if she has no objections. Since I can't write her directly,
you would be,
very bird trass to her any answer I may write. It's
true that I am also a brazilian papa.
I don't care surgest
nd pretty line? Many mards to her.
that she write me First, it's not polite, and then we would even-
tually snap at each other again, but I lieve
lieve that I wouldn't mind
being bitten by her. Oh well, I love to suffer.
love to suffer. Hello to Dina,
naturally.
You write
I'll write you, and some day I'll return
(signed)
P.S.
Here is my address. Take good care to write it in full.
I'm often on the mad.
David de Panaskhet
C/O Jan Pilsudski .
Caixa Postal 1173; (Lana)
Sao Paulo
Prazil

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_43.jpeg ---
14-00000
Bao Pale 29 Octobre 1959
Chers Nathela Loula
Patigue d'un long voyage
signé le PELICAN
Vingt mille liques sous les mers, autant dans les airs
mers,autant
me volla
Cha-cha-chaland.
Rio voir Francis Carco est une ville magnifique
plaisirs
principales industries: Les et l'amour.
aura
presilien j'aurais appelé cette ville Icilombaise.c'est peut-
etre moins poetique que Rio de Janeiro mais plus dans le ton
feralt rapidement fortune a solzner le foisonnantes
chaudes-pisses et autres petits details venerieas.
Je suis ici pour quelques temps.J'ai un petit
travail a terminer dans le pays dans le genre de coucou tu
as vu,tu m'as pas vu, viens que je t'attrape.Cela me pren-
dra certainement quelques semaines si ce n'est pas quelques.
mois apres ca je pense pouvoir vous rendre une petite visite
a toute vitesse entre deux coups de feu.
Pour l'instant je me traza trouve a Sao Paulo qui
une ville encore plus magnifique que Rio,et plus grande aussi.
Au cinema on voit Burt Lancaster et Brigitte Bardot parler
un portugais sans melange.Il y a quelques temps doja, ils
parlaient l'allemandim impecablement?
Me voici encombre d'une nouvelle langue. Cela
ressemble fortement a l'espagnol et je pense m'adapter assez
vite.mais tout commence par s'embrouiller, anglais allemand
russe francais georgien espagnol.Vive l'esperanto! Si un
jour je vais on Chine je suis foutu.
Maintenant vous aves à peu près une idéo do
co
_
__
+3
L
7

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_45.jpeg ---
'14-00000-
Monsieur et Madame Dr.Louis ELBET
a TALLARD
(Hautes Alpes).
PRANCE
:
27
SLEE

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000
October 13, 1959
Dear Paul
Am sending David's letter to ba forwarded further by you
This letter is dated 19 Oct. 59 so please post on or after
that date.
"
Will send you other letters he may write in the future.
Thanks a lot for the conveniences and will appreciate your
sending me any letters he shall receive
Sincerely,

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_44.jpeg ---
14-00000
que j'ai fait jusqu'ici,et d'ailleurs je ne suis pas sense
reconter ma vie
Je pense souvent que ce serait bien de se
revoir pour rire un peu et avoir quelques joyeuses sorty
marseillaises. Comment alles-vous
filles Elico, Irane.
aussi comment vont les
Catny.J'aimerai bien avoir un mot de
chacune d'elles si la plume n'est pas trop lourde.Cela fait
ues. Par le meme courrier
plus d'un an que je ne les af vues.Par
J'ecris Atcnico de sorte que si Atchico entendait les filles
parler de moi la maison 11 n'y aura pas de gene ou de sur-
prise Je 11s en train de penser que maintenant elles ont un
oncie d'Amerique Ca fait bien.Evidemment je n'ai pas encore
de ranch,d'ailleurs meme si j'en avais la possibilite cela
ne me tenterait pas.
Comment va Zouquette ? at Sophie ? J'espere
que tu la vois toujours et dans ce cas dis lui que je serais
reellment content de recevoir quelques lignes d'elle si toute
fois elle le veut bien.Ne pouvant lui ecrire directement tu
serais bien gentille de lui retransmettre mon eventuelle
reponse.C'est vrai que je auis aussi papa bresilien.
Et la belle Eliane? Bien des choses a ello.Jo
n'ose pas lui proposer le m'écrire d'abori ce n'est pas poli,
et ensuite on arriverait encore à se mordre, mais je crois que
'aimerais assez etre mordu par elle.Que veux-tu, j'aime souffrir
Bonjour a Dina, naturellement.
moi.
David de Fanasknet
c/o Jan Pilsudski
Caixa Postal 11734(Lapa)
Sao Paulo
Tu m'ecris.je vous ecris et un jour j'arriverai.
BRASIL
P.S
Voici mon adresse.Prenez bien soin de l'écrire
en entier. Je suis souvent en deplacement
:
i

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
(brother Achille)
Mr. A. De Panasaket
I bla
Architecte
Avenue Bellevue (Lablache) GAP
ly Dear Atchico:
26 Oct 1959
For one hour now
have been trying to start my, letter, and
don(t know how to start.
My departure from GAP was inevitable,
because you “know what my situation was there. Had it been possible
would have written to you sooner but it was not possible.
Many things have remained as I left them and I don't want you to
pay for anything which is my responsibility.
me who you have paid and how much
I hope you will tell
'
soon as you answer me
I will send you money. I could send you the money this time but
do not know if my lotter will reach you and will try to keep
In touch with you again. When I left Ambert I left instructions
for you but I kn don't know if they were carried out. I will
write to Dassaud and I will know what has happened so far. I have
have been
been here for a few days and was very busy kilt since I left GAP
1
I cannot explain what I am doing but I ask your confidence.·
How are the girls. I would like tohave some photo's of them.
I kiss ever, body
__
Dave
201.233477
i

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
Mra. Elbet is aves' brother's first wif
(friends)
Mr. & Mrs Dr. Louis Elbet
& TALLARD. (Hautes Alpes)
France
26 Oct 59
"Tiied from a long journey".
signed the Pelican.
and now I am in Cha-Cha land Rio is a magnificent town
principle industries are pleasure and love.
If I were
Brazilian I would say here ERRAX make love. Maybe this name
maax
is less poetic than Rio de Janerio but it is more poetic in the xma
would
sense. Louis xttt make much money if he were to come here in
will be here for
treating veneral disease cases. I henchone
several months and after that I think I will come and see you.
Now I am in San Paolo which is more magnifant that Rio.
In the movies you can see Bart Lancaster and Brigitte Bardot
talking in fluent Portugese.
I am now learning anew language, Portugese, which seems to
be very much like Spanish. Exarxx Everything now becomes mixed
in my head. Yaxwita English, German, Russian, Prenon, Georgian
Spanien. If I go to Cina I will be lost/if I have to learn that
language/
I think often of you. How are you and how are the girls.
Elico, Irene and Cathy I would like to have a letter from each
one. It has been almost a year since I have seen them. At the
same time I am writing to my brother.
How is everyone?
My best regards to them.
20.-233477.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_5.jpeg ---
14 00000
i.
:
SECRET
DISPATCH SQ
HEPA-4142
HEADQUARTERSE NO
TO
INFO
INFO
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief, SR:
Chief, WHD
Chief of Station, Rio de Janeiro
Chief of Base, Sao Paulo
SUBJECT
REDWOOD/ASACRE
Accommodation Address.
ACTION REQUIRED
See below:
REFERENCE(S)
SAOP-1036, 2 October 1959
Dult
DATE
(201-233477)
7 March 1960
-
(CHECK ON
MARKED FOR INDELING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
INDERING CAN BE JUDGED
BY QUALIFIED MO DESK ONLY
=
In connection with paragraph 2 of reference, effective immediately it is
requested that letters sent to Timothy K. Rancifer for insertion in the local
mail system be sent instead to the following address:
20.
True name of Lucian W. Fabsik
American Consulate General SP
APO 676, New York, New York
3 March 1960
Distribution:
4
-
Headquarters
2 Rio de Janeiro
2
STL
-
-
files
1053
1401
ÚŠE PREVIOUS Lodo
2012 AND S
AMICH ARE CHOULE
D.C. Highy
David C. Higby
KBPA-4142
55.00PM
2014 3
7

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_52.jpeg ---
1-4-00000
Monsieur et Madame Joseph DASSAUD
14, rue Saint-Joseph
Ambert Puy de Dome)
PRAD
C.B.
L

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_49.jpeg ---
14-01000
TRANSLATION
DAVID'S 1ST LETTER TO
Dear Jo and dear Lise
i
I think it's about time I wrote you again. I won
der if, perhaɔs, these long months of silence haven't caused
you to doubt my affection for you all, although before leav
ing you, you knew already that where I was going. it would
be impossible for me to remain in contact with you
How contact
is
How often have I seen the monent when I no longer
had the chance to write you, and nevertheless, today this
possible
and I no longer know what to tell you
is a blank but above all it's your turn to tell me what you
My mind
have done. Where you are
you are, life continues. You come and
you see people
go;
and how are the three of you? What are
you doing? I'm in such a hurry to hear from you that I want
to mail this letter even before finishing it. There are so
many things you can tell me because I need to hear you, to
read you, and to be with you as before. I'm sure that some
day I'll return and we'll have fun like crazy, but this is
for later, perhaps in a few months from now?? I am now the
most handsome man in Brazil. Evidently not for very long
since I arrived only yesterday, but word has gotten around
you know. They line up to see me!
In the meantime I was travelling all over, but
above all I travelled quite a bit by air, and it can be
said that since I left you, I spent half my time flying in
the
e clouds with all kinds of planes, and also sometimes with-
out planes. Sao Paulo is the pearl of Brazil. You meet a
lot of Brzailian men and some pretty Brazilian women, but
what I'm interested in is to know if you are all really in
good health. My (greatest) wish would be to have a very
long letter from each of you, including little Michel.
I give all three of you a very affectionate and
big kiss.
[ signed ]
P.S. I want to point out to you that since the
mail here leaves quite a bit to be desired and since. I
travel very often, it's better to write carefully the ad❤
dress I'm giving you. In any case I'll receive your letter.
201 233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_50.jpeg ---
14-06-200
le 11 Octobre 1959
:
Tres cher Jo et très chere Lise
pense qu'il est grand temps que je vous donne
signe de vie Je me demande si parfois ces longs mois de
silence ne vous ont pas fait douter de mon affection pour
vous tous, bien qu'avant de vous quitter vous saviez ceis,
que-la ou je me trouverais il me serait impossible de rester
en contact avec vous
Combien de fois j'ai vu venir le moment ou je
"
avais plus eu l'occasion de vous ecrire et pourtant voild
qu'aujourd'hui cela m'est possible et je ne sais plus quol
vous dire Tout se vide dans mon esprit mais c'est surtout
à vous de m'expliquer ce que vous avez fait -- Là où vous.
êtes, la vie continue. Vous allez, vous venez vous vores
des gens
et puis comment allez vous tous les trois? Que
faites-vous? - J'ai envie d'expedier cette lettre avant même
de l'avoir terminée tellement je suis pressé d'avoir de vos
nouvelles Il y a tant de choses que vous pouvez me raconter
parceque j'ai besoin de vous entendre, de vous lire et d'etre
avec vous comme par le passé. Je sais bien qu'un jour e
reviendrai et nous rigolerons comme des bossus mais enfin
ceci est pour plus tari, dans quelques mois peut-etre??
Maintenant je suis le plus beau de Bresil evidement il n'y
a pas longtemps puisque je n'y suis arrivé que depuis hier
als case sait deja vous savez. On fait la queue pour xə
voir!
->>>
Entre temps j'etais en voyage un peu partout nai
j'ai surtout fait beaucoup d'avion et l'on peut dire que
depuis que je vous ai quitte j'ai passe la moitie de mon
temps dans les nuages avec toutes sortes d'engins volant,
et parfois aussi sans avions Sao Paulo est la perle du
Bresil On y rencontre un tas de Bresilien et de jolies
Bresiliennes mais ce qui m'interesse c'est de savoir si vous
etes tous vraiment bien portant. Mon plus desir serait
d'avoir une tres longue lettre de chacun de vous -- Mon
petit Michel inclus
Je vous embrasse tous les trois très affectueusement
et très fort.
(signed)
P.S. Je tiens a vous signaler que la poste ici
laissant quelque peu à desirer et etant moi-même très souvent
en deplacement if vaut mieux ecrire avec soin l'adresse que
je vous donne. Entous les cas j'aurais votre lettre.
i.
7

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_51.jpeg ---
14-00000
30 Faulo.Brasil
c/o Jen
Caixes Pet 11724, Hepato
Sac Paals,Brasil
mi chen
19 bebe 959
restor
j
in contact
but
grand
temps que fo
ande & parson, as lach mis ole
afaction pour
for fait douter de mo
qua
neving defe
avant de nom quilter.
tromverans it one seront impossible ble
avec sou
Combien de fors far
this and secanon de
in
venit le
von cure it pourtant voilà qu'aufour-
'hi cela in est possible et
Tont
se micke
dorin
de in expliquer i que
ji
we
sais flis quoi vous dire
export mais c'est surtout à vous
-
bi ai vous êtes, la
que vous any fart
any fart - ha
ne witimes. Vous allez,
alley
at luis comment
veney,
vons
des.
gun...
toin his tras ? he faites-
voyez
If an envie d'expedier cette lettre wount wie de l'avoir ter-
wice tellement ses pare d'avoir des mauvelles I
stant de choses que van joung we reconter faccique j'ai besoin
de van entendre, de
por la passe. Je sais bien
rigolerous.
live et d'etre avec vous
qu'un four fo reviendron at
comme des bossen mus of
dans quelques main
funt-etre ??
ya
now
of cast pour plus land,
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_53.jpeg ---
14-00000
bived
2Phd th
Manten
mis le plum
dlogo
m'y a pas longtemps puisque je mig sin
ca se sait defin
savvy.
on fait la queue jour
voyage
Entre temps fetais en voye
tout fait beamong
- He
Les images
avec toutes sortes
for partout
partout mais j'ar
just
t'on peut dire que dis
di
ilant. et parfois
São Paulo est la perte de Breal buy
rencontre un tas de Bresilien et de jolies Brentines mais
ce qui in interesse c'est de savoir, on vous etes him main
bien portant. You plus desir serat d'avoir
lettre de discende
Jan
on jetzt Michel
très longue
ihi
von cimbrance for les hors dies dres effectman.
at the fort..
Dath:
riguales fre, le poste in laissent
wing this sount in
deniter et tant
vant ment corite an
bom d'adone
replacement il vant
don
E
--
can J'aurais votre lettre
que
site.
to repla
op

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_54.jpeg ---
.
1.
14-00000
rue Sil
Amber Puy de Dome
Dear Joe & Loise
I think it's time to give you
indication I'm alive. You
some
mustn't be surprised at my
silence
because as I told you before, it will
not be possible to write to
you.
Today But today its possible.
Everything is minet up I
am
somewhat confused, od st
just
gr
ahead and tell me
whats
new there.
How are you
? What have you
201-233471
beur doing. You have so much

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000-
to tell me and I needy to hear you
and be with you
as before. I
am
awaiting anxiously to have news of you.
I know one day.
that I will come
back, and we will have
will have a good
time again together. That, however,
will be certainly not before several
months. Now I am in Brazil.
0
have been all over the place...
many
times on pls arplanes.
Today I am here in Sao Paolo.
a very beautiful city. My
It's a very
greatest wish is to have a
letter from each of you.
P.S. I
and you
long
service
that mail here is
a little poor, and as I
am
tires in transit, please write my
aft
correctly.
Dath

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_6.jpeg ---
4-00000
Translations
-John Roberts
Savid's letters being done by E/France Desk
France Nick Letzou, We / Frae
George Boublik, 1108 J (our contact re translations)
110G Judg
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_59.jpeg ---
00000
SECHET
MEKCRANEUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Lockpicking Instruction for AEASPIC
6 October 1959
Case Officer, Fred Kirkpatrick picked up George F. Huns, TSS/ASD
and drove him to safehouse for purpose of instruction of basic
fundamentals of lockpicking to AFASFIC. Instruction was from 1100 hours
to 1230 hours. After lunch, Muns was driven back to town.
was introduced to a ent as "George".
Muns
Sirag Naily Soy ful
1- Suby's 201
Seely's
F. Kirkpatrick
SECRET
2233477
.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_57.jpeg ---
14-00000
7.
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief, ban
COS, RIO
203, Sao Paulo
Operational/IDSFOOD/BEACHB
ervicing of
ACTION REQUIEL
EPENCRÈS).
21.
Instructions, sea below
DIR-47334, 6 October 1999
BAOP 1030, 2 October 1999.
21 September 1999
FORUM
10-57-53
277-35-15 OLAJA
DATER
12 October 1959
RE
CHECK ONE)
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDELING REQUIRED
INDEXING CAN USED
BY QUALIFIED HQ DESK ONLY
:
It is muusted that Bear
ma for corvicing
istion sêtre referred to
reference
Until
are received, Dase plan
pline to
WOCK
with the work of 11 October 1959.
8 Octchar 1959
Distri
-
Chier
COS, Rio
ChizF
SR
:
Timothy
Instky K. RANCIFI
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.”
REPLACES FORMS
51-28 51-2BA AND 51-79
CLASSIFICATION.
WHICH ARE ORSOLETE.'
:
NOV 1959
:
201-233477
HEPA-3747
NUED
CONTINUE
PAGE NO.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_56.jpeg ---
14-00000
SR/DCB/59/1-768
13 October 1959
MEMORANDUM PORT Director of Security
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
REPERFICE
William J. Cotter
AEASPIC
#174803
Meno from Director of Security, did. 6 Oct. 59.
is suggested in paragraph two of the referenced memorandum
Subject, on October 1959, was presented to the Immigration and
Naturalisation Service for registration and fingerprinting.
2. Thrée photographs of the Subject are attached. Hia physical
description is as follows
DOB;
PCB:
Heights
Weighti
Eyes:
Hairs
Builds
Scars
12 July 1918
Tiflis, Georgia, USSR
.5° 6°
136 lbs.
Brom
Black (Balding)
Small, viry
üld broken nose. Tip of thumb and first
finger of right hand missing. Scar near
right knee.
CHT/vat
Distributions
Orig & 1 - Addressee
12 - DCB Security
1
-
Chrono
MICHAEL RAE
Chief, SR/DOB
401233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_58.jpeg ---
1-4-00000
Well Eva7ba-Skars
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Alien Registration of ASFIC
9 October 1959
SE/DOB Case Officer, Fred Kirkpatrick drove AASPIC to
in
119 D Street N.E. for a 1000 appointment with iss C
alien
room 57 of Immigration and Naturalization for purpose of
registry. Full fingerprints and true biographical information were
taken at this time. Certificate of Registry will be forwarded to agent
by Immigration people in the name David DURVARD.
And Kirkpatrick
FRED KIRKPATRICK
21.2334.77

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_60.jpeg ---
-1452 0000
SEONE
$3/103/59/175/
1 October 1959
MEMORANDUM FOR: Central Cover Livision
Non-official Cover Branch (Jack Lynch)
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
Cover Alias
REFERIECE
SR/DOB Mano No. 1748 dtd. 30 September 1959,
Subja AZASPIC, Request for Cover.
Subject of referenced oran dua is to use the alias of
David DURVARD..
SECRET
GEORGE A. FIIL
Acting Chief, SR/DOB

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_63.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Office Memorandum •UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO
Chief, Soviet Russia Division
DATE: 6 October 1959
FROM
Director of Security
SUBJECT:
REASPIC - #174803
REFERZICE: Memorandum from D/C, S3 Division dated 29 September 1959
1.
Action has been initiated with the Immigration and
Naturalization Service to permit the subject to remain in the
United States in a parole status for an additional six months
period. This is the normal length of time for which such
paroles are granted. If necessary, at the expiration of six
months, assuming the conduct of the subject so warrants, eps
will then be taken to further extend his parole.
2.
It is requested that this Office be provided with a
complete physical description of the subject, along with front
view and profile photographs. In addition, in order to satisfy
the requirements of the NS, it is felt that he should be
presented to an appropriate official of the I&NS for registra-
tion, which will include the taking of his fingerprints (for
submission to the FBI). This registration procedure and other
security aspects of his handling during his stay in the United
States should be discussed with a representative of this Staff
in the immediate future.
3. The request for a security approval for his utilization
by TSS is currently being processed in the Security Support
Division of this office.
FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY:
William Cotter
William J. Octter
Chief, Alien Affairs Staff
SECRET
233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR: Central Cover Livinion
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
Non-official Cover Branch
(Jack Lynch)
AEASPIC
(Request for Cover)
ST/108/59/2018
30 September 1959
ARASPIC is a contract agent with an operational approval.
overseas assignment has been postponed, it is desired to hold him
in this country for about nine months. TSS has agreed to utilize his
services during the period he is in the U.S. and has requested a covert
security approval which is now being processed.
2. Subject will be paid by SR/TOB and handled by a DOB case officer.
He will be working in safehouse muumber 269 recently vacated by TSS.
3. It is requested that a non-official cover be provided Subject to
explain his employment in safehouse 269 and that he be provided with a
backstopped cover story to permit him to rent an apartment in the downtown
area and to live in a normal manner
in a normal manner. Subject's proposed alias is forwarded
under separate cover.
4. Listed below is background information on Subject. For additional
information contact 0. H. Todd of this office on extension 4705.
General Information
a. Subject is a contract agent being converted to contract
employee for a 9 - 12 month period.
b. Subject has an OA. A CSA has been requested.
carriage tost.
He has had a satisfactory psychological assessment and a
1
di No previous non-official cover.
Biographical Information
A.
108.12 July 1918, TIFLIS, USSR. Subject is male, divorced,
currently a French citizen.
20-233477
:
I

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
2
Subject has says college education, makes a
and can pass as a professional nan.
His take hose pay will be $400, a month.
good appearance
d.
in Germany
• Most of his life has been spent in France with war time jobs
·LA..
He speaks Franch, German and Georgian. His English is
adequate for making his own way in day to day situations.
Security Considerations
Subject knows he works for "U.S. Intelligence".
mare,
• In an emergency involving agent contact, Chief, SR/DOB,
SR/>OB/CO? or Security Officer/SR/TOB on extension $331.
6. Subject is in this country "black", having arrived about
six months ago. Prior to that he was in France for several years. He
is currently being held in an SR safehouse.
OHT/vat
Distribution:
Orig & 1 - Addressee
2
->
SR/DOB Security
1
-
SR/DOB Chrono
SECRET
PEHRI E. CROOKHAM
Acting Chief, SH/DCB..
477
I

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_66.jpeg ---
.14-00000
:
TO
SENDER WILL CHECK CLASSI ATION TOP AND BOTTOM
UNCLASSIFIED 176” “FIDENTIAL SECRET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
NAME AND ADDRESS
SKC/DOB
L
INITIAL
NITIALS
Luk
HJ
DATE
☐ FACTION
☐ APPROVAL
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
Remarks:
DIRECT REPLY
DISPATCH™
FILE
INFORMATION:
PREPARE REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
RETURN
SIGNATURE
Retain in
file
294389
29 SEP 1959
FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER
FROM: NAME. ADORESS AND PHONE NO.
Desk
FORM NO.
UNCLASSIFIED.
Replaces
TORPRES 237 Bellarm Form 30-4
DATE
CONFIDENTIAL
SECRET
(40)
´US GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, 1993-0-142531

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_69.jpeg ---
14-00000
In the event after full consideration, it is still deemed essential
that he remain in this country during the interim period, it is
suggested that the Director of Security be provided with a de-
tailed memorandum of justification.
FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY:
:
Willian Cotter
William J. Cotter
Chief, Alien Affairs Staff

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_68.jpeg ---
14-00000
Office Memorandum
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO
DATE:
18 September. 1959
FROM
Chief, SK/DIY
Director of Security.
SUBJECT:
:
AFASPIC
174303
REF
SR/DOB Memorandum dated 14 September 1959
10
The subject is an alien who, at the request of SR/DIV
(for the purpose of Redsox training), was parolled into the U. S.
into the custody of the CIA in April 1959.
-
2. According to the referenced memorandum, the subject's
training for this purpose has been suspended until about
1 August 1960, when it will be reinstituted. This delay, it
is understood, is due to the fact that his proposed mission
has been postponed until late 1960.
3. It is observed that SR/DIV proposes that the subject
be permitted to remain in the U. S., without being in custody,
until his training is reinstituted in late 1960, and, in the 1
interim, his services will be utilized by TSS. It is also
noted that the subject has, in the past, been convicted of
robberies abroad; has engaged in various nefarious activities
and that his knowledge of the English language is limited.
4. Although recognizing that the subject is undoubtedly
a likely candidate for the Redsox program, and further, that,
psychologically, it might well be preferable for the individual
to feel that he is not in an "arrest" category, still, this
office is reluctant to place in jeopardy the arrangements made
with the Attorney General by CIA, whereby individuals otherwise
excludable can be brought into the U. S. for training or for
other operational purposes.
"
5. It is felt, consequently, that further consideration
should be given to the necessity for keeping AEASPIC in the U. S.
during the period he is waiting for his training to be commenced.
235
77

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_64.jpeg ---
14-00000
ORIG
577/SE/LS
Perry Crociha
UNIT
SR/DOB
EXT
8331
DATE
5 October 1959.
10
SAO PAULO
FROM:
DIRECTOR.
6
CONF:
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
S-E-C-R-E-T
CI, CI/OPS, FI, WH 4, S/C 2 (R100 3 (POUCHED))
'TO
SAOP
REDWOOD AFACER
REP
SACP 1036 (IN 32746)
B. DIR 45223 (OUT 98152)
OCT
ROUTINE
PRIORITY
C
R
OPERATIONAL
IMMEDIATE
ROUTING
INITIALS
19
OUT 109
Riad (bo, panch)
CHEDI
24
47334
1. WILL USE ADDRESS PARA 1 REP Â.
2.
POUCH TOO SLOW. WILL SEND DE PANASKHETS MAIL TO RANCIFER FOR REMAILING.
3. REQUEST INCOMING MAIL AS OUTLINED PARA 3 REF B.
END 07 MESSACK
ESSA
REF A. Requested accommodation address for use by Agent David De Panaskhet.
REF B. Suggested accommodation address for above Agent.
Janics
1/
SR/10
SR/COP/FI
M. Keck
WH/2 RD Galin
4G OFF
S—E—C—R_E-T
*
NOCT 1959
CSR/DOB
R
Q
MICHAEL RAE
ENTICATING OFFICER
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
No.
21-2334907 No
C/WH
SING OFFE

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_65.jpeg ---
14:00000
26/01/01/ct/c/T
OCT 1950.
BATE
to
FROM:
DIRECTOR
ACTION
INFO'
1. B/6/2
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
GRET
ROUTING
3
70
ROUTINE
IN 32746
INFOR
CITE
RIOD (POUCH)
SAOP 1036
REDWOOD AEACRE
REF DIR 45223
DIR 45223 (OUT_Sɛig2 )*
DASE HAS ACCOMODATION ADDRESS CITED SAOP 762 (IN 30009
SEE HEPA 2603 TRE THIS BOX.
2. RE PARA 2. REF BASE DOES NOT UNDERSTAND WHY OUT LETTERS
OF DAVID DE PADASKHET NOT POUCHED BASE FOR INSERTION LOCAL
POSTAL SYSTEM, UNLESS SERVICE DEEMED SLOW. SUGGEST USE APO
ADDRESS RANCIFER RATHER THAN OPEN MAIL TO FWD OUT LETTERS TO
SAOP IF USE POUCH UNDESIRABLE.
3. CAN REMAIL INCOMING LETTERS AS SUGGESTED PARA 3 REF IF
TRIS METHOD DEEMED MORE DESIRABLE THAN POUCH.
4. ADVISE IF HOS INTEND USE ABOVE BOX OTHERWISE, WILL TRY
OBTAIN ANOTHER.
END OF MESSAGE
COMENT: *REQUESTED ACCOMODATION ADDRESS FOR USE BY AGENT DAVID DE PARASICHET,
–
SECRET
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PRO
$OCT 1959
1881-233477
SPOMENES!
Copy No.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_67.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
29 September 1959
MEISORANDUH FOR:
Director of Security
'ATTENTIGH:
Alien Affairs Staff
SUBJECT:
ARASPIC
REFERENCE:
174803
Office of Security Momo datod
18 September 1359
Purther consideration has been given to the
holding of subject agaat in the U.S. prior to the
activation of his operation in the summer of 1960.
Maintaining him in a "hold" status abroad, probably
in Germany, was also considered. The nature and
sensitivity of the operation with which subject
be connected makes preferable a holding
status as close to Headquarters as possible.
Employment in a Headquarters element would provide
day-to-day supervision and make possible periodic
operational contacta to review questions of
security, morale, and new operational developments.
2. berefore, SR Division solicits the
support of the office of Security in making it
possible for us to hold the agent in the 0.8.
during the next year, making the necessary
arrangements with the Attorney General.
CHARLES KATEK
Deputy Chief, BR Division
!
53677

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_7.jpeg ---
H
14-00000
Accommodation Address for David
David De Fanaskhet
c/o Jan Pilsudski
Caixa Fostal 11744 (Lapa)
Sac Faulo, Brazil
(rss)
Gerry kahoney, 1825 x 53-4
•Murray 8 491.
1212 Barton Hall, WH/2B
our contact w/ WH/23 re
David's mail to and from Brazil
pseudo
The name and APC is:
Mr. Paul Haglo
Agency
AFO 676
=
New York, New York
weifer (live);
New Accompridation Address for Davil: Eduardo Callo
Paul A. Maggio | LUCIAN W. Fabsm
American Consulate General, SP
APO 676, c/o Postmaster
New York City, New York
Cala Postal 11744 (Lapa)
dad Paulo, Brasil
20
J01-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_72.jpeg ---
}
F
14-00000
f
SEGRET
a.
Medical Benefits. Subject will receive such dental and
medical benefits as may be necessary to maintain his physical status for his
eventual use on his assigned mission. Costs to be borno by SR/DCR Station Funds.
b. Insurance. Insurance coverage for death or disability
incurred in line of duty, not to exceed 5,000.00. Costs chargeable against Project
AESENTINEL.
Resettlement.
initial provisions made for resettlement
of Subject still apply.
Entertainment. Basic entertainment expenses will be borne
by Subject. Occasional enter alment expenses will be borne by SR/DUB Station
Funds
10. Contingen gations. Although, no such promise has been made the
Subject, resettlement in the United States could possibly become necessary as
form of control, should this be deemed necessary from a security viewpoint.
Subject.
11. No commitments other than those stated above have been made to the
12. At such time as Subject re-enters training for his proposed mission,
about 1 July 1960, all provisions of his initial engagement will again apply.
Dists
Orig. & 1 Addresses
-
1 - Contracting Officer
į
SPORET
MICHAEL RAE
Chief, SH/LCB

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_71.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECTET
SH/DOB/59/ 1775
17 September 1959
MEMORANDUN FOR Chief, Finance Division
THROUGH
FROM
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE
Special Contracting Officer
Contract Approving Officer, Michael Ra
agement of Ernest G. HAICAINK (p) as Independent Contractor
SUDOR/59/1660, dated 24 July 1959 to Finance Division re same
subject
1. Project AESENTI, under which subject individual has been
engaged, was originally approved through the period 11 March 1960. A request
for renewal and areandsant of the project has been submitted to FI, and it is
intended subject individual will be utilised under this project during 1960.
;
2. The following provisions will apply to subject individual dirring
the interim period, 1.0.1 20 September 1959 through 30 June 1960.
3. Tem and Project Charge. Subject individual has been engaged.
under oral contract for use under Project ASENTINEL. The effective date of the
oral contract is 20 April 1959, and has been extended through the period 31 March
1961, subject to tormination by the Government upon thirty (30) days actual notice.
4. Security Approval. The initial security clearance obtained for
Subject's use, CICA No. C-73532, dated 11 March 1959, has been suspended during
the interim period. Requests have been made of the office of Security (SST) and
Alien Affairs Staff) for subject's use.
5. Citizenship. Subject is a foreign national.
6. Carpensation. Subject will be paid salary in the amount of 2400.00
per month, payable in United States currency.
7. Quarters and Subsistence. Basic quarters and subsistence costs will
be borne by the Subjects Occasional incidental expenses will be borne by.
SH/DOB Station Funds.
"
8. Operational Expenses. No Operational Expenses are contemplated
during the period covered.
9. Other Comitments. The following additional commitments have been
made to the Subject:
233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_70.jpeg ---
14-00000
n
CLASSIC
ECR
Peny
DOL
10
EXT
530 GIS/S/S:/
Perry Crookhar:
SR/DOL
8331
DATE 17 Septer or 1939
TO
SAO PAULO
FROM DIRECTOR
CONF:
INFO
SR 6
CI,
C/VH
CI/OPS, FI, MP 4, S/C 2
SAOP
REDWOOD AEACRE
CUT 60152
$53
45263:
45223
1. REQUEST LOCAL ACCOMODATION ADDRESS FOR USE
BY AGENT DAVID DE PANASKHET.
2. ALSO NEED NAME AND ADDRESS IN ORDER. MAIL HIS OUT
LEUTERS 10 SAO PAULO FOR YOUR INSERTION INTO LOCAL POSTAL
SYSTEM..
3. INCOMING LETTERS SHOULD BE REMA ILED IN SECOND
ENVELOPE TO ROBERT P. HACHE PO BOX JOZÓ S.W. STATION
WASHINGTON 21 DC.
22 SEP 1959
END OF MESSA CE
5.10.
SR, COP, FI
WH2
RD Galiy
SECRET
TOTHER THAN THE ISSUING
MR.
s
MICHAEL RAE ..
201-233477
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_75.jpeg ---
14-00000
In the event after full consideration, it is still deemed essential
that he remain in this country during the interim period, it is
suggested that the Director of Security be provided with a de-
tailed memorandum of justification.
FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY:
William J. Cotter
Chief, Allen Affairs Staff
STAD...

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_73.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: David's use the name David De. Fanaskhet
Where: In France, everwhere
When:
1956 to present
21 September 1959
With: All friends and relatives
Registered with police as D. Tzitzichivili. In Gap, France when
police called him in they referred to him as Mr. De Panaskhet but
while they questioned him they referred to him as Kr. Tzitzichivili.
David has no official documents in the name of De Panaskhet, all of
This documents are in the name of Tzitzichivili.
David had a chess club membership card in the name De Panaskhet.
David wrote a book "It's Better for me to sit in the chair (electric)"
.
a crime novel. An article concerning this book with a picture of
Dave appeared in the newspaper La Provencal this article had a
picture of Dave with the name De Panaskhet, in 1957.
->
:
201-233477
""

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_74.jpeg ---
14-00000
REP
Chief, SR/DIV
Director of Security
AFASPIC
174803
SR/LOB Memorandum dated 14 September 1959
18 September 1959
The subject is an alien who, at the request of SR/DIV
(for the purpose of Redsox training), was parolled into the U. S.
into the custody of the CIA in April 1959.
2. According to the referenced memorandum, the subject's
training for this purpose has been suspended until about
1 August 1960, when it will be reinstituted. This delay, it
is understood, is due to the fact that his proposed mission
has been postponed until late 1960.
3. It is observed that SR/DIV proposes that the subject
be permitted to remain in the U. S., without being in custody,
until his training is reinstituted in late 1960, and, in the 1
It is also
interim, his services will be utilized by TSS.
noted that the subject has, in the past, been convicted of
robberies abroad; has engaged in various nefarious activities
and that his knowledge of the English language is limited.
4. Although recognizing that the subject is undoubtedly
a likely candidate for the Redsox program, and further, that,
psychologically, it might well be preferable for the individual
to feel that he is not in an "arrest" category, still, this
office is reluctant to place in Jeopardy the arrangements made
with the Attorney General by CIA, whereby individuals otherwise
"excludable can be brought into the U. S. for training or for
other operational purposes.
5. It is felt, consequently, that further consideration
should be given to the necessity for keeping AEASPIC in the U. S.,
during the period he is waiting for his training to be commenced.
201-233477
:
!
1

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_79.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
INTERNAL
ONLY
CONFIDENTIAL:
☑.
☐ SECRET
SUBJECT: (Optional)
FROM:
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET-
Examination of Agent in Safehouse September 3, 1959
AC/OD/MS 2714 I Building (3348)
TO: (Officer designation, room number, and
DATE
building)
4.
S.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
.11.1
:
12.
13.
14.
15.
C/SR/DOB
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
RECEIVED
FORWARDED
Attention: Mr. William Romer
AR
9 September 1959
COMMENTS (Number: each comment to show from whom
Draw a lin ross column after each comment:)
PREVIOUS
FORM 610 US Hono
DEC 36
EDITIONS ☐ SECRETI ☐ CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY.
UNCLASSIFIED
1,2, GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFER: 1944 0 4
:
"
'

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_77.jpeg ---
14-00000
...
SP/C0B/59/ 472-0
14 September 1959.
MEMORANDUM POR: Chief, CS/SSD
ATTENTICH
SUBJECT
Hr. Sichard Hanna'
Request for ZI utilization of agent, ABASFIC
1. Background:
Subject was brought
20 April 1959 for train to the United States via BRAINBOW light
after which he was to have been dispatched
on a black mission into the US as a member of a A team during late
1959. CI/CA Divisica approved (No. C-73532) on 11 March 1959. The
proposed mission was recently postponed until late 1960, and it is
presently contemplated that subject will re-enter training for the mission
about 1 August 1960.
2. Inasmuch as considerable time, effort and expense have been
devoted to the recruitment and training of the agent, who appears well
qualified for the mission, it is desired to retain his during the interin
in a productive capacity. Due to his rather unique background and
capabilities, it is believed he could be employed in a useful capacity
by TSS.
3. In view of the foregoing, it is presently planned to release
subject from the present 24-hour custody, permit his to reside in an
apartment in Washington, D.C. under alias, and work on a daily basis
for TES offions in an established (TSS) covert site. The work tentatively
planned for him involves cataloging specific information taken from East
German documents, and developing and/or improving tools and methods for
picking locks. Although W35 might present other related requirements,
subject's employment would not involve work which would preclude his
eventual use as a RFD30X agent.
4. By separate memoranda, CI/CA Division has been requested to
suspend subject's CA until he resumes training, and 05/Alien Affairs Staff
has bean requested to coordinate with Immigration and Naturalization
Office concerning subject's proposed status and documentation.
5. Your approval of paragraph 3 above is requested.
6. For further information on this subject, please contact
Mr. Perry Crookhan on extension 8331.
Distr: 0.1, 1's file
1-Chrono
MICHAEL RAS
Chief, 2/205 47233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_76.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
i
SR/DCB/59/3
14 September 1959
HEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, (S/Alien Affairs Staff
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
Mr. Pennington
Change of status, case of AFASPIC, CI/CA No. C-73532
1. As outlined in the attachment, it is desired that subject's
present 24-hour custodial status be suspended until such time as he
re-enters RIGOX training about 1 August 1960, and authority be
granted for him to reside in an apartment in Washington, D.C. under
alias, where he will not be under 24-hour supervision. Subject is to
be employed by TS5, and will report daily to an established TSS covert
site..
2. Although subject will not be under constant direct supervision
during this period, he will be reporting week days to a T55 representative,
in addition to which he will be contacted on a weekly basis by a member
of this Base. Subject's unescorted movement will be limited to
Washington, D.C. proper and he has already been informed of various other
restrictions which he must abide by, i.e.: no auto, no driver's permit,
no permanent room-mste, certain bar and night club limitations, and so
forth.
3. Subject is available at the convenience of your office for such
visits to Immigration and Naturalization Offices as may be deemed
necessary.
4. For further information regarding subject agent, please contact
Hr. Perry Crookhan on extension 8331.
Attachment:
cc Momo for Chief, OS/SSD
Distribution:
Orig &1 - Addressee
‹Y - Subj's 201
1 Chrono
-
MICHAEL RAR
Chief, SR/DOB
21-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_78.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
:
53/008/59/
11 September 1959
HEMORANDUM FORT Chief, CI/CA Division
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT
Mr. Ray McCornon
Request for suspension of CI/CA No. C-73532 (AFASPIC)
As reported teleponically to your office, it is presently
planned to utilize subject agent in the Washington, D.C. area, under
alias, from the present time until early sumer, 1960. Subject will
be working on a daily basis for TSS offices in an established (TSS)
covert site. The work tentatively planned for him involves cataloging
specific information taken from East German documents, and developing
and/or improving tools and methods for picking locks. Although TSS
may present other related requirements, subject's employment will not
involve work which would preclude his eventual use as a RFDSOX agent.
2. By separate memoranda, authority for utilizing subject in this
ZI employment has been requested of CS/350, and 05/Alien Affairs Staff
has been requested to coordinate with Immigration and Naturalization
Office concerning subject's proposed status and documentation.
3. It is therefore requested that subject's Operational Approval
be suspended, to be reactivated upon request about 1 August 1960, at
which time subject will re-enter training for the originally plamed
REDSOX mission.
4. For further information regarding this subject, please contact
Mr. Perry Crookhan on extension 5331.
FC/vat
Distribution:¨
Orig 2.l Addresses
->
1.- Subj. 201 file
1 - Chrono
:
MICHAEL RAE
Chief, SR/DCB

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
.com
Chia
Chief of Station, No de Janeiro
Chief of Hase,
MED OP/ASHES
Accommodation Address
Bea boles
1036, 2 October 1959
IL
(201-32477).
17h 1960
Iz einection with para of refrence, afective
reussted that letters sent to finetly ifor?
laystem be sent instond to the following address
True ase Lucian
Fabaik
AFC 676, New York, New York
stely it is
nortion in the local
1
3. March 1960
Distribution:
- Nederłopa
Bio de Janeiro
2 - Clics.
STL
Marid C. Ng
SE
201-233477
:
br-1142
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_80.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
9 September 1959
DEANDUM TO: C/SR/DOB
NTION
SUBJECT
William Romer
Examination of Agent in Safehouse September 3, 1959
History: Subject states he has always been in good health.
He is an ex-French foreign legionaire, survivor of German concentration
and has held many jobs under various conditions. He feels in
excellent health and is free from complaints.
Physical Examination: Height 5'6", weight 136 pounds, age 41.
General Small, wiry, balding Frenchman with prominant features who
appears in excellent health. He is intelligent, cooperative and quite
sociable. Blood pressure 110/70, pulse 66, respiration 14, temperature
98.6° Head and EENT: Evidence of old broken nose with a deviated
septum. Neck and nodes: negative. Chest: lungs and heart negative.
Abdomen negative. Genitalia, rectum and prostate: negative.
Orthopedic and neurological: negative.
negative. Scar near right knee.
3. Impression: Healthy male with life expectancy (under ordinary
conditions) to age 68 or 70. No reccomendations.
SECRET
K.. Buchanan,
LEE X. BUCHAKAN, M.D.
Acting Chief, Operations Division,
Medical Staff
'
33477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_81.jpeg ---
14-00000
20 August 1959
Ernest G. Mayerink:
You are hereby notified that your services under an agreement
ith the Covernment, effective 20 April 1959, are terminated effective.
the date of this memorandum for
convenience of said Government.
Effective this date upon the
Supon the affixing of your signature, you
relinquish all further claims against the Government for services
furnished during the effective period of such agreement.
1-m
Your signature in the space provided below is acknowledgment
of the contents thercof.
ACKNOWLEDGED
WITNESSED
By Contracting Officer
1

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_82.jpeg ---
14-00000
ligent.
2 (DAVID)
201-233477
1718 JULY
12
TIFLIS
141
1943
might
BERLIN GER
GEORGIAN, SSR.
AUSTRIA
POLAND (LODZ, POZEN, WARSAW).
h

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_84.jpeg ---
14-00000,
NA
NA.
1940-1941
CAVALRY
DISTINGUISHED PRIVATE

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_83.jpeg ---
14-00000
GEORGIAN
FEORGIAN
FRENCH
GERMAN
SPANISH
ENGLISH
AGE: 40"
"'10" WEIGHT
:
ATIV
WELL
FAIR
FAIR
56 KG.
i
GOOD
WOUNDS ON
INDEX FINGER
+ THUMB.
TIP OF
FORE FINGER
+
THUMB of
.
FRENCH
WELL
FAIR
FAIR.
UNDER
STAND
care.
WATER
Weil
FAIR
FAIR.
LEFT HAND
ACCIDENT.
With
Caccre
GRENADE
RIGHT HAND MISSING.

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_85.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
A
NA
NONE
1939
1923
:
:
915
ELECTRICAL
ECOLE BREGUET
PARIS
PARIS,
FRANCE
i
I
Im
FREEY

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_86.jpeg ---
NA
14-00000
stand by the agest
•Candid
AUTO MECHANIC Ass
NIGHT WATCHMAN
WELDER
LATHE OPERATOR
FRANCE
744
NA
T

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_87.jpeg ---
14-00000
light 2. (DAVID)
PART TWO (Operational Data
Biographical
1. Agent's cryptonym AEASPIC
Russian spelling
SECRE
2
Agent's operational
Native Language spelling (if other than
Russian)
familiya otchestvo
inva
familiya
otchest
inva
3. Operational names for mother and father
Russien spellings
Native Language spellings (if other than
Russian
(mother)
(mother)
inva
otchest
imva
otchestve
(father)
(father)B
inva
otchestvo
otchostro
Infiltration
4. Approximate date of agent's departure from training area
date of agent infiltration (6
day
Sept
month
1959
Jear
5. Approximate
6. If infiltration is by air or water how long will the agent stay in hiding befors traveling to the
target area?
1 hour 30 minute
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_88.jpeg ---
14-00000
Fission
SECRET
Describe the itinerary of the agent from time of infiltration to time of oxfiltration. (This information
is needed in order to avoid using places be will visit in the documents.)
flight
8.
Will the agent seek employment while on the mission?
No
NO
9. Will the agent contact any relatives or friends while on his mission?
If so, indicate their places of residence.
Exfiltration
10. Approximate date of exfiltration
Sut
month
59
year
11. Indicate method of exfiltration Walkassen illegal
12. If method is illegal border crossing, indicate exact location on bordor. (This information is needed for
necessary border cachet or border pass.)
SECRÉT
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_9.jpeg ---
RAVIC
14-00000
CALLO
Caixa postal 11746 (Lapa)
Sao Paulo
BRASIL
Madame Colette KHOMERIKI
30, rue Cabanis.
PARIS 14°
PRANCE
Bourde
SELO
41.233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_91.jpeg ---
20 August 1959
TO Contracting Officer
Effective this date, and in concurrence with the Governme
0.
esentative, Ernest G. Mayerink, request that I be paid this
date all monies accrued to me and held in escrow for by the
Government under
under an agreement with said Government for the period
20 April 1959 to 20 August 1959.
:
Enst 6
ERNEST G. HAYC RIBNE
"
""

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_90.jpeg ---
14-00000
20 August 1959
Ernest G. Maycrinks
You are boroby notified that your services under an agreement
with the Government, effective 20 April 1959, are terminated effective
the date
date of this
andus for the conventence of said Governmen
emorandum
Effective this date upon the affixing of your signature, you
relinquish all further claims against the Government for services
during the effective period of such agreemen
fun
Your signature in the space provided below is acknowledgment
of the contents thereof
ACKNOWLEDGED
WITNESSED
By Contracting Officer
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_89.jpeg ---
14-00000
Semarks
SECRET
13. Indicate any proposals or suggestions on the part of SR for document legend;
issuance, etc.
place of PASPORT
140
Has the agent been asked his ideas as to cover? If so list them briefly.
15. Is this to be a singleton operation?
No
If this agent is to be infiltrated with
one or more others, will they be traveling together during the operation?
YES
16. Attach any photographs (even though taken several years ago) which the agent might have of himself.
(This is of the utmost importance in cases where the agent was born before 1930,
SECRET
:
:
O
!
NATTH
01142G WÝM Z

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_92.jpeg ---
14-00000
(EVEN WHEN BLANK)
NO SD 33065 A
DATE 6 August 1959
I DO HEREBY DECLARE THAT MY TRUE AND LEGAL SIGNATURE IS:
WITNESS:
(SIGNAT
NOSD 33065 B
DAVAD Tzi 12 CH
(NAME. UNTED
SECRET
SECRET
(EVEN WHEN BLANK)
RIGHT THUMS PRINT
DATE
6 August 1959
I DO HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE THAT IN MY RELATIONS WITH THE
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, I WILL USE THE FOLLOWING SIG-
NATURE WHERE REQUIRED:
17
WITNESS:
(SIGNATURE).
EINEST. G
MAYCRINK
(NAME. PRINTED
50
tuck
SECRET 211-233477
RIGHT THUMB PRINT

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_93.jpeg ---
14-00000
Siographical Deta
David TZITZICHETILI was born 20 December 1919, in Tbilisi
Georgia. He is 5' 7" and of slight build. Subject has been
assessed as of superior intelligence. He identifies himself with
city life and although of Georgian birth and ancestry, has lived
nost of his life in France. Subject served in the French army as e
private (1939–1941). Upon demobilization, he worked in Germany a
an electrician (1943-1945). lie was liberated by the U.S. Army
1945. Subject speaks French (native), Georgian, German and some
English.
201-233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_96.jpeg ---
14-00000
94
Ernest G. MAYCRINK
David Tardent
AFASPEC
**
AEGELTEEL Project—
•
Hempyrog'i tadi. Contingly or Field agentj
Field Agent
SR/DOB Gregg Ross
fiver
•
337
==
.FI..
20
-No
18.7 6
None
David TZITZICHVILI (True nome not to go out of SR Division)
201-233477
:
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_94.jpeg ---
14-00000
Chief, Finance Division
Special Contracting Officer
FRONT
Contract Approving Officer, Michael Rae
12/0/591 1660.
2 July 1959
SUBJECT: Engagement of Ernest G. MAYCRINK (F) as Independent Contractor
Term and Project Charie. The subject individual has been
enga¿ed under oral contract, for use under Project AS. The
effective date of the oral contract is 20 April 1959, and shall continue
thereafter for a period of one year subject to termination by the
Government upon thirty (30) days actual notice.
2. Security Approval. The appropriate security approval for
Subject's use has been obtained. Type Operational Approval, No. C-73532,
dated 11 March 1959.
3.
40
Citizenship. The Subject is a foreign national.
Compensation. Subject will be paid salary in the amount of
500.00 per month, payable in United States currency. Of this amount,
he will actually receive $50.00 per month during training and the duration
of the mission. All unpaid monies will accrue to his credit in i escrow.
account, the payment of which will be dependent upon the proper performance
of his duties and be payable upon completion of mission for which engaged.
Provisions also made for payment of bonus not to exceed 10,000.00.
5. Quarters and Subsistence. The subject will be furnished quartors
and subsistorica. These costs to be borne by 5/DB Station funds.
6. Operational Expenses.
authorized.
Operational travel and expenses to be paid as officially
Station funds.
8. Domestic travel costs will be borne by
Travel costs to and from the United States, and foreim travel will be
charged against Project ASENTIN
b. Operational expenses to be borne by Iroject AESENTINEL.
Training expenses to be carried by Station Allotment..
233477

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_95.jpeg ---
14-00000
Other Card tments
The following additional cord trants have been made to
Subjects
Medical
cal Benefits. Subject will receive such dental and
medical benefita as my be necessary to perul
properly perform
his ass mod ission Costs to be borne by a Ca alon Funds
Insuranc Insurance coverage for Ceath or disability
incurred in line of duty, not to exceed 5,000.
exceed 5,000.00. Costs chargeable
against Project ASETEL
resettlement
a country other
Provisions made for resettlement of Subject
that in
In which he was recruited. Costs
as
resettlement will not exceed 1,000.00, and will be chargeable against
Project ANTEIL.
d. Entertainment.
borne by SR/DCB Station funds.
all normal entertainment expenses will be
8. Contingent Obligations. The following has not be promised the
individual, but may have to be met by the Governments
I
Resettlement in the United States, either as an additional
bonus for the Subject or as a form of control should this become necessary
from a security viewpoint.
9. No commitments other than those stated above have been made to
the Subject.
C/vat
Distribution:
Orig1
->>>
Addressee.
1 CR/FF
-- SR/DCB Finance
Subject's 201 File
1. - Chrono
MICHAEL RAE
Chief, SR/Don
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_98.jpeg ---
14-00000
...
Salary payment record
27 April
20 May
9 July
20 August
$50.00 drawn from DCB/Finance by George Fill as initial $25.00
payment each to A ASPIC and AENUTMEG/3. Receipts obtained and
Subeditted to Bernie Mohr
$200.00, representing partial salary for agents for period 20 April
to 19 May drawn from DOB/Finance by Perry Crookhan. 350.00 paid.
APASFIC, $150.00 paid AENUTMED/3, of which 100.00 was refunded to
DCB/Finance, and a TA sent The Hague with request the $100. be
converted to Swedish Kroner and forwarded in ADNUTMEG's letter to
is parents Receipts for 350. and 150. obtained from the agents
and filed in respective 201 files.
as
$200.00, representingpartial salary for agents for period 20 May
to 19 June drawn from DCB/Finance by Perry Crookham. $50.00 ar
above amount for AASPIC being held in his 201 file. 150. of
above was drawn for ADNUTMEG 3 - $79.00 of which was converted to
400 Swedish Kroner and posted to ANUTMEG's parents in his letter.
The remaining 71.00 being held in NUTMEG's 201 file. Receipts to
be obtained time of payment.
$100.00, representing partial salary for agents for period 19 July
20 August drawn from DOB/Finance by Fred Kirkpatrick. #50.00 of
above amount for AEASPIC and $50.00 for AENUT E3/3. Receipts
obtained. Following receipted to be obtained for total salary/
bonus amounts for both agents, in view of project postponement.
"
AENUTMEG/31 $42.95 (total refund on allotment to parents)
$1350.00 (total escrow account)
$1000.00 (total bonus)
AFASPIC:
Plus new set of totaling $600.00 (200. for months of
May, June and July as per written.
$1700.00 (total escrow account)
$1000.00 (total bonus)
NOTE:
AFASPIC's partial salary receipts are in order
re agreement.
i
•

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_99.jpeg ---
14-00000
Hap study for concealed movement,
Map locations bys
1. Universal Military Grid
Latitude and
Notes In view that final maps for ops were not known, very
little stress was placed on Grids and Lat; Long systems.
Compass Subjects:
1. Two Compasses were available U. S. Army Lensatie and Swiss
lectar direct reading types.
2. Agents selected the Lensatie as their choice.
Not to much emphasis was placed on compasses, but enough to
enable the agents to use a map.
Following subjects of compasses were taughts.
a. Azimutha
b. Book aɛimiths
6. Converting from Map to Compass and Compass to Hap
d. Map orientation by Compass
8. Compass, nite use.
6. Instructors Observations of Students
David is very intelligent and shows an interest in doing a good
job on his assignment. Is cautious, out spoken, and desires to talk over
any requirements given to him in writing. He diplomatically assums
Leadership and discusses aspects of problems with his partner Al. He also
was very interested in the subject of Map and Compass and personally
thanked me for the interests showed in their questions.
Al is also very intelligent and he, I think, respects Davida age and
knowledge and accepts Davids leadership. However, if he does not fully
understand Davids comments, he questions David until he is satisfied in
his mind that what David is doing is right,
:

--- Image 104-10182-10004_page_97.jpeg ---
14-00000
FROM
7
2 June 1959
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief SR/DOB
SUBJECT
Training Staff SR/DOB
Billy Jack Johnson
AESENTINEL Training 25-30 May 1959
Hap and Compass
The originator enjoyed the opportunity to instruct agents
AFSENTINEL 1 an
and 2 in Map and Compe
2.
Heavy stress was placed on Paps. Compass work had to be
brought into the subject but in a very light degree.
3. The agents showed a very keen interest in the subjects and
felt that they had really improved their working knowledge in Maps
and Compass.
4. In Maps, the following subjects were covered.
What are maps and why they are needed.
b. Various types of maps.
c. Terrain and how indicated on maps.
d. Map orientation, Compass inspection, Graphic
8.
True North, Mag North and Grid Narth.
f. Map declination
.8.
Map direction
h. Sand Table contours
1. Cardboard profiles
j. Map Symbols
k. Ridge lines and Valleys
1. Terrain Movement
212-239477