

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_1.jpeg ---
14.00000
104-10073-10279
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
☐
!
TO
Chief, Sov Bloc Div; Chief, Far East Division
INFO.
Chief, WOMUSE/ICG
4/N
☑
PROCESSING ACTION
MARKED FOR MOEING
NO INDEXING PEGUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, (
(Tokyo of 413-3
JZ
RYBAT (MHPASHA REDTOP
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
TOKYO 7263
18-3
-
MICROFILM
Beheiren and the Four U.S. Navy Deserters
As noted in reference, forwarded herewith is a copy of the sub-
ject memorandum. Please note that the information in the memorandum
Paragraph B. 4. b) is particularly sensitive and should only be
given properly restricted dissemination.
mack).
Mark J. LIDGERWOOL
03
]
ATTACHMENT
Memo dtd 27 Nov 67
Distribution
✓ 2 - C/SB Div w/1 cy attach
1
-
H
C/FE w/1 cy attach
2
C/WOMUSE/ICG w/1 attach
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
CLASSIFICATION REVIEW
Conducted On 1--10-76
E4,2 IMAPDET CL. BY 060595
GS COPY
CROSS REFERENCE TO
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
Excluded fra asta
downgrading a
09884
DATE
DEC 6 1967
FJTA-53626
CLASSIFICATION
SEGWE TRYDA
HQS FILE NUMBER
E TRYDALUNKNOWN

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
tour on behalf of EIREN, Soviet poet Yevgeni Yevtushenko,
rt that has not yet reached fruition but is still por
11. Participation in the Stockholm July 1967 "World Conference
24 Vietnam," by sending two BEHEIREN activist leaders as delegates.
12. Cooperation with the U.S. Quakers, pacifists, and Earle
Reynolds in sending the yacht "Phoenix" with medical aid, first to
iphong, then on a second trip in the Fall of 1967, secking but
Wiling to find landfall to deliver medical aid to either North or
South Vietnam.
13. Attempted, but failed due to inability to obtain U.S. visa,
to scad a BEHEIREN activist leader (HUTO Ichiyo) to the U.S. to
participate in the 21 October 1967 anti-Vietnam War demonstrations.
14: Currently carrying out a fund raising campaign to send an
aid ship to North Vietnam. In this, and other activities, DEHEIREN
leaders are maintaining ever closer liaison contact with their
counterparts abroad, such as the French "Conite' Vietnam National."
In an effort to generate public support for this aid ship fund
raising campaign, BEMEIREN succeeded in issuing a public appeal,
under the endorsing signatures of Tokyo Governor MINOBE Ryokichi and
Yokohama Mayor ASUKATA Ichio, as well as the usual intellectuals
supporting BEHEIREN.
15. In October 1967, EEHEIREN solicited approval to hold anti-
Vietnam War demonstrations in front of the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo,
expecting to be denied and then intending to make this denial a court
test case. Instead, BEHEIREN was given this permission, and conducted
two orderly and well-publicized demonstrations in front of the American
Embassy, garuering a larger public turn out of participants than in
any previous BEHEIREN-sponsored demonstration.
'
16. Assisted and abetted the defection to the USSR of four
American sailors from the U.S. Navy carrier Intrepid. Following this
success, BEHEIREN's most effective activity to date, BEHEIREN leaders
are organizing a permanent "underground railway" of Japanese intell-
ectuals who will volunteer their homes as possible "way stops" for
hiding future U.S. military deserters that BEHEIREN now hopes to
induce.
Comment:
N N N N N N
For other details, see Tokyo intelligence reporting:
-11547, 31 May 1966.
-12046, 14 October 1966
-12690, 10 May 1967.
JT-12851, 5 July 1967
FJT-13081, 8 September 1967
FJT-13154, 27 September 1967
[FS]-13303, 22 November 1967
Also, OSS 6790, 11 July 1367
zz
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
MW
ATTACHMENT 3
SECRET
Partial Listing of American and Other Foreign
Persons Known to Have Been in Contact with or
Cooperated with BEHEIREN
Americans.
2.
✓ Staughton Lynd (ez-Yale professor)
☐ Norman Mailer (novelist).
3.
5.
Dave Dellinger (Editor of Liberation)
Howard Zinn (Boston U. professor))
Donald Keyes (National Committee for a Sane
Nuclear Policy)
David EcReynolds (Chairman, War Resisters'
League)
A. J. Huste (now deceased)
Karl Meyer
9. William Davidson
10. Bradford Lyttle
11. Charlotte Thurber
12.
13
(Hiss) Quentin Bassett (Students for a Democratic
Society)
✓ ☐
Murray Levin (Boston U. professor)
14. Robert Ockene (Veterans and Reservists to End
the War in Vietnam)
15. Carl Oglesby (Chairman, Students for a Democratic
16.
_
Society)
Barbara Deming (Associate editor of Liberation)
17. Joan Baez (folk singer)
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
18. Ira Morris (Paris expatriate)
19.
Otto Maisan (phonetic, New York City peace activist)
20. Barbara and Earle Reynolds (divorced but separately
active long-time residents
in Japan).
21.
William R. Christensen (an American pacifist drifter,
who gave BEMEIREN its first
experience in the summer of
1866 in exploiting for pro-
paganda in Japan, and then in
arranging the onward journey
of an American who wanted to
defect to the USSR)
22. Brian Victoria (head-shaved pacifist and "converted"
Buddhist priest, known to be in
regular contact with the Soviet
Embassy in Tokyo)
23. Mr. Willowby (fnu, phonetic, "chief of the Quaker
Peace Action movement in the U.S")
244 An unidentified American of Japanese descent, from
Hawaii, who is currently a student at Waseda University
25. Kosaku Yamaguchi (reportedly born in U.S., present
citizenship status unclear) (formerly
was a professor at Momoyama University
in Osaka, but has been teaching at the
University of California in Berkeley
for some time)
B. Other Foreigners.
1. Mikhail Kotov, USSR (Soviet Peace Committee)
Claude Bourdet, France (French Committee to Support
the Vietnamese People)
Peggy Duff, Great Britain (Campaign for Nuclear Dis-
armament)
James Endicott, Canada (World Peace Council)
Faiz Ahmed Faiz, Pakistan
6. Gabita Muslepov, USSR
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
7.
8.
9.
"
SECRET
-3-
Mrs. Erdenebat Ojon, Mongolia
Konstantin Shugnov, USSR
10.
Francis Marcel Kahn, France (Comite' Vietnam
National)
Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, France
"
11. Thích Nhat Hanh, South Vietnam
COMMENT:
S
This is not, by any means, a complete listing, nor
does it necessarily list BEHEIREN's most important
activist contacts abroad. But this list is re-
presentative in showing the breadth of BEHEIREN
liaison abroad, particularly with the American
"new left".
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
32
SANKEI (Full)
November 21, 1967
Prof. YOUNG Says Four American Deserter Seamen Not in Japan Any More
Went to Tokyo and Tried to Dissuade Them;
Probably Escaped from Japan on the 12th or the 13th
(New York, November 20, Correspondent Tadashi ONODERA) Professor
* Ernest P. YOUNG of Dartmouth College in the U.S., consented to an interview
with this reporter on the question of the four American seamen who deserted
1 from the U.S. aircraft carrier Intrepid. At the interview held on the 19th,
Professor YOUNG clarified that the Peace for Vietnam Association (Beheiren,
with Makoto ODA acting as its representative) contacted an anti-war organiza-
tion in the U.S., and at this, Professor YOUNG hurriedly visited Tokyo, and
☐ meeting the four seamen in a room in an apartment house in Tokyo on the 9th
rand 10th; tried to persuade them to return. In regard to the present where-
Trabouts of these four seamen, he made the noteworthy, statement that "those
(four were still in Japan, up until the night of the 11th, when I left Japan
12 but they are probably no longer in Japan now co
-
C.Families Perplexed.
11
100-0044
Ecogrees the 1936 WHAZ OL SHINK
The questions and answers exchanged with Professor YOUNG are as follows:
Why did you go to Japan?
LL
'
Professor: Beheiren contacted David DERKINGER, a pacifist activist
in the U.S., asking him to "send someone to Japan to hear the stories of
the four seamen and announce them in the U.S." I have been in Japan twice,
and I also once served as special assistant to Ambassador REISCHAUER.
During that time, I became friends with Beheiren representative ODA' and'
Tother intellectuals in Japan. It was for these reasons that I was given
this assignment. I personally have never participated actively in the
Of anti-Vietnam war movement so far
(3)
seamen?
'
12
When did you arrive in Japan, and where did you meet the four
Professor: I arrived in Haneda on November 8, and met the four seamen
bron the 9th and the 10th. The place of interview was in an apartment house"
pein Tokyo, but I cannot say at this time where that apartment house was and
who owned it. However, on both days, I talked fully with these four seamen,
gefor more than three hours on each occasion (according to an investigation
made by the public security authorities, Professor YOUNG arrived in Japan
toward the evening of the 8th, and stayed at Hotel Tanakanwa in Shiba,
as Minato-ku, until the morning of the 11th).
J
:
What were the motives for these four seamen's desertion?
•
☐ Professor: The desertion was completely the decision of these four
persons. It seems that the four seamen decided not to return to the ship,
1 when the Intrepid entered Yokosuka Port on October 17, and they were per-
au mitted to go ashore for rest for one week. My impression on meeting these
four seamen was that they were definitely not deserting for the purpose of
chself-advertisement or that they were giving false reasons. I am convinced
that they deserted really out of doubt about the Vietnam war.
What were the movements of the four after they deserted?
1
"
Professor: On the night of the 23rd, two days before the Intrepid
was due to sail, the four went to Shinjuku, and told the people whom they.
met at ä bar they happened to visit, that "we are fed up with war." The
Japanese who heard them sympathized with them, and at one time, the four
lived with some hippies (according to this paper's investigations; they
include Mr. K., a student of Tokyo University's Liberal Arts Department,
and vanguard artist A., who gather at Fugetsudo in Shinjuku.) Finally,

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
3. Respectable Intellectual Front: Following funda-
mental Communist principles for mass movement work (better
than the JCP itself follows these tenets), the ex-JCP
organizers of BEFEIREN kept themselves in the background
and lined up a number of prominent Japanese progressive
intellectuals and leftist cultured persons to front for
BEHEIREN. The choice of ODA Makoto, ex-Fulbrighter and
popular young novelist, to be the chief front man - Chair-
man - was an extremely lucky stroke for BEHEIREN. ODA has
taken to this grand-standing, front work like a duck to
water. It has given him a chance to give unbridled vent to
his own latent anti-American foolings, puffed him up to the
extent that he has been dubbed "the emperor" by other BEHKIREN
activists, and given him at long last an ideological mission
to pursue. YOSHIKAWA has performed magnificently in feeding
ODA's ego needs and in infusing and indoctrinating ODA so
that his words and actions take on sufficiently virulent
anti-American overtones. ODA has served another vital
function for BEHEIREN by recruiting a sizeable number of
fellow intellectuals to join the ranks of BEHEIREN activists.
(Attachment 1 is a listing of a number of those Japanese who
have been identified as active BERRIREN supporters or sympa-
\thizers.)
4. Organizational Development: In its 2 1/2 year history,
BEHEIREN has not appreciably changed its organizational format,
although it has moved its office three times and modified its
name even oftener. PEHEIREN is not a "mass organization", be-
cause it has had no sizeable popular backing to the present
time.
Its hard core, secretariat organization is run by
YOSHIKAWA and his lieutenants. Its public image, intellectual
front is led by ODA, and given body by a score of like-minded
intellectual friends of ODA and YOSHIKAWA, who form the loose
body of EEHEIREN's activist leadership. Under this BEHEIREN
leadership superstructure lies a paltry base of only several
hundred BEHEIREN "rank-and-file" supporters, mostly young
Japanese students. Organizationally, BEHEIREN has no formal
membership system, so its base of supporters is fluid and not
precisely measurable. However, the base support for BEHEIREN
has definitely been on the upswing during 1967, and made such
notable strides during the past summer that JCP Headquarters
officials finally felt constrained to note with concern that
BEHEIREN was beginning to drain off a growing number of pro-
gressive youth who otherwise would have been absorbed into
the JCP's own youth movement. BEHEIREN leaders have tried to
help this growth along by setting up a youth section, calling
it "Young BEHEIREN. BEHEIREN's imaginative actions and
publicity-conscious programs have been responsible for its
recent growth, and this period of growth seems to be now on
#
SECRET
F

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
they were taken to Beheiren by a student who spoke English (according to
this paper's investigation, this was Mr. S., a Waseda University student).
After that, they were hidden by Beheiren. I cannot say where they were
hidden..
*
C
Were the four firmly determined. to desert?
i.
Professor: My purpose in visiting Japan was to dissuade the four.
I explained to them what the results of their desertion would be. I even
retold them that they would never again be permitted to stand on American soil
their fatherland. At the time I met them, it was still at a stage where
and they would only receive light punishment, if they reported back immediately,
3. saying that they "had missed their ship." However, their determination was
firm, and my persuasion had no effects.
broad
--- The four seamen's desertion was announced in the form of a press,
interview given by Beheiren. Were there no facts of their having been
forced to desert, during that period?
☐ Professor: I ascertained that point, too. However, they firmly denied
any fact of their having been forced, saying that they had voluntarily
consulted Beheiren as to whether they should publicly announce the we
intention to desert, and if so, in what form this should be made.
Where are the four seamen now, and where are they planning to go?
A
Professor: I am certain that the four of them were still in Japan,
up until the 11th, the day I left for home. However, they already knew
fully well that it was not possible for them to obtain asylum in Japan.
They even said that "we will probably have to go to some third nation,
which is neutral." (The public security authorities judge that the four
seamen left Japan immediately after Mr. YOUNG's persuasion, and consider that
they probably were smuggled out of Japan after the 10th, and before the
evening of the 13th, when Beheiren announced their desertion at a press
conference. However, Mr. YOUNG says that the four seamen were in Japan up
until the night of the 11th. Therefore, the possibility is strong that they
were smuggled out of Japan by ship, between the night of the 11th and the
bon evening of the 13th.) -
orig
The films showing the four seamen were shown publicly in the U.S.,
VIOL
btoo. What were the reactions in the U.S.?
"
•
Professor: When the films were publicly shown, there was big excitement,
with rows and rows of television and press cameramen. I thought I would be
exposed to persistent questioning by the FBI and the CIA, after I returned:
home, but so far, I have only been questioned once by the Navy's Intelligence
C Section, about the circumstances. It seems that American authorities con-
cerned do not want to make too big a fuss over the matter.
What do the parents think of this action taken by their sons?
Professor: A certain television station asked the mother of one of
the four men about her son's life. This mother was completely perplexed,
saying: "My son is a most average American youth. His school records
were quite ordinary, and he liked sports, just like any other student.
WTH I cannot understand why he acted in such a way
abby:
LOKNDY
-
2 33
Sug batus
KH
4577
Lank
HOA'
Taes

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
‘ATTACHMENT. 4
THE YOMIURI
YUICHI YOSHIKAWA, sec-
1 retary-general of the Japan
Peace-For-Vietnam Commit
tee (Beheiren), teils a press
conference Tuesday that the
four deserters of the US war.
ship Intrepid hoped to stay
In Japan but the Beheiren
could not help them to do so.
Noid
22N
4 US Deserters Possibly
Wednesc
Left Japan Aboard Baikal
The four deserters from the US aircraft carrier Intrepid who made a dramatic tele-
vision appearance Monday in Moscow are believed to have left Japan irregularly
by the Soviet-liner. Baikal which left Yokohama on November 11 for the Far East
Soviet port of Nakhodka.
•
'
Not Worrie
ters,
When he first met the deser
ters, they were
penniless but appeared quite
practically
men
.
Sources in the Metropolitan test against the Vietnam war,
Police Department sald Tues- at a press conference held No.
day that the four Americans vember 13 in Tokyo...
could have boarded the ship by Yoshikawa said that
a special gangway for Soviet serters first wanted to live
Yoshikawa said that the de unconcerned, Naito said..
Government officials.
He said the deserters ap
Japanese watchmen were on the Beheiren to find them jobs, and
peacefully in Japan and asked Parently enjoyed hipple life,
guard at another gangway for in which they could utilize (noodles) and shochu.
living on cheap Japanese food
ordinary passengers when 222 their English proficiency..
drink
listed passengers. including
such DS udon
eight Americans, boarded the they could not live in Japan if possible in Tokyo.
The Beheiren told them that wanted to live in Japan, and
1. He said the four Americans
liner before it departed Yoko without being found by the
The watchmen told police authorities sooner or later, Yo
hama at 11.50 am, November 11. Japanese police or US military decided to ask the help of the
that they did not see any per- shikawa said.
Naito and his friend Yamao
son who was not on the pas
Beheiren and
enger list board the ship
delivered
four
the
Lived Like Hippies around November 26.
to the Behelren.
through the ordinary gangway.
Hiromi Nalto. 20, a painter: Nalto said he believed that'
cials of the Soviet Embassy and Shimbun that he and his hot communists and that they
It was learned that 17 offi- of Tokyo, told The Yomiuri all the four Americans were
trade mission in Tokyo and
trade mission in Tokyo and friend, Sansel Yamao, a hipple had no interest in communist
scores of visitors boarded the
poet and
Baikal
member of the ideology.
through the special Beheiren, acted as go-betweens He said the four must have
gangway. :
for the deserters and the decided to go to some neutral
The police sources said that
Beheiren;
it was "quite possible" that the the four deserters-Airman could not live in Japan.
Nalto said he met two of after they learned that they:
☐ country via the Soviet Union
Soviet authorities in Tokyo ar- Dick D. Bailey, 19, and Airman A spokesman for the Justice
ranged the deserters' exit..
Beheiren Pledge ple hangout
Mike A. Lindner, 19-at a hip- Ministry said Tuesday that
Yuichi Yoshikawa, secretary- around October 20.
Shinjuku there was nothing legally
general of the Japan Peace-For-
He said both Americans leaving Japan because the ad
wrong' in the four Americans
Vietnam Committee (Beheiren), wore leather jackets and other ministrative agreement in the
told a press conference Tues- informal clothing which they Japan-US Security Treaty gua-
day that the committee could said they borrowed from their rantees US military personnel
disclose how the four Japanese hipple friends hang- the right to come, to stay in
Americans left because it had ing around the Shinjuku area. or leave Japan.
promised, not to do so.
not
.
He neither affirmed nor dent-
ed the report that the Amer
icans left Japan by the Balkal
on November 11.
.
⋅
in
"
..
•
•
Bailey and Lindner and the He said he understood that
other two-Airman John M. the four Americans were tech-
Barilla, 20, and Airman Ap-nically still enlisted US mili.
20-went around in pairs,
prentice Craig W Anderson, tary personnel.
1. It was the. Behelren "which
⠀
Naito, said..
Furthermore, If their exit
announced for the first time Lindner stay overnight at his made an official request to the
took place on November 11, it
Nalto said he let Bailey and was before e US authorities
the desertion of the four crew house in Hayamiyacho, Neri- Japanese police to search for
members of the Intrepid to pro- ma-ku, from October: 24 to 25. them, he added.
He also said there. were no
Japanese Jaws allowing charges
to be preferred against the
Beheiren officials and other Ja.
panese people who "protected"
the Americans in Japan and
helped their departure to the
Soviet Union.

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
i..
[
SECRET
-3-
the verge of really picking up speed and momentum. As a result
of its role in the case of the four deserting sailors, BEHEIREN
has reaped bountiful publicity, has succeeded in touching a
delicate Japanese public nerve of sympathy and pacifism, open-
ing a floodgate of support for BEHEIREN from all over Japan.
When this case fades from the limelight, it is still most
likely that a fair percentage of current wave of popular
support for BEHEIREN will solidify into permanent mass backing,
giving BEHFIREN, for the first time, a meaningful base to
support its future activities,
5. Activities and Accomplishments: BEHEIREN has engaged
in a number of propaganda actions, and participated in inter-
national anti-Vietnam War activities. It has tried to co-
operate with certain front activities in Japan controlled by
the JCP, most notably the Japan Committee to Investigate War
Crimes in Vietnam activities, which culminated in the Tokyo
Court of last August, but has been soundly and rudely rebuffed
by the JCP. In spite of this, BEHEIREN has churned along at
its own pace, with a continuing series of anti-Vietnam war
actions, most of them related in some way to the American
pacifist movement. In this regard, BEHEIREN has succeeded in
cornering a virtual monopoly on Japanese contacts with the U.S.
pacifist movements, and has effectually capitalized on this to
promote its own action program. The case of the four deserting
sailors, while an apparent lucky windfall for BEHEIREN, only
points up the fact that BEHEIREN, through past organizational
work and promotional activities, was "johnny-on-the-spot",
ready and capable (unique in Japan in this regard) to take
the ball and run with it. BEHEIREN ran all the way in this
case and scored its most notable success since it was organized.
(Attachment 2 is a listing of BEHEIREN's more notable activities
since its founding. Attachment 3 is a partial listing of
American and other foreign persons known to have been in
contact with or cooperated with BEHEIREN.)
B.
"
The Case of the Four Sailor Deserters and BEHEIREN.
1 How It Started: The consensus of all available overt
media material, with no recorded dissent, indicates that the
four sailors voluntarily left their ship, went AWOL, and ended
up wallowing around Tokyo's hippie-land. Precisely what personal
grievances prompted the four to embark on this mis-adventure is
not yet known. But, up to this point, the four could fairly be
categorized as misguided youngsters, gone astray in a foreign
land, and due to get slapped back in line with traditional
Navy justice when they finally decided to stop the fun and go
back to the ship. So far, this made their cases far from
unique.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
How It Became an Incident: But instead of returning to
their ship of their own volition or being apprehended by the
Share Patrol, the four made contact with BEHEIREN leaders.
Again, press reports indicate that this was just a coincidence,
that there was no pre-planning by the four to contact BEHEIREN.
There are no available overt nor covert reports that indicate
otherwise. But, once the BEHEIREN people made contact, they
recognized the potential immediately and moved fast for the
kill. (Attachment 4 is a Yomiuri Newspaper clipping, 22 Nov-
ember 1967, that is both a representative and comprehensive
account of this phase of the case. Even if this article
should contain some minor inaccuracies, the basic line seems
factual and has not been challenged elsewhere.)
3. BEHEIREN Takes Over: When the four made contact with
REHEIREN, it suddenly became an entirely different ballgame.
BEHEIREN had everything needed to capitalize on this: veteran
activist leaders who are experienced enough to recognize the
windfall that had come their way; an apparatus that could
provide hiding places for the four; long standing liaison
contacts with Soviet Embassy officials for use in planning
exit from Japan; solid contacts with reliable American
pacifists with whom the bona fides of the four sailors could
be checked; money and organization to capitalize on the
propaganda potential (such as preparing a movie film for the
initial BEHEIREN press conference announcing the desertion,
prepared more likely than not by BEHEIREN stalwart_EUEQ.
Keinosuke, an independent film producer) and English speaking
activists capable of sympathizing, encouraging, soothing, or
agitating the four young sailors, so that there would be no
turning back.
The BEHEIREN Apparatus At Work: While many of the
small pieces of this puzzle, which would put the whole case in
proper detailed chronological order and eliminate speculation
on minor points, are still missing, enough is known now,
through overt and covert Bources, that the picture of EEHEIREN's
adept handling of this case shines through clearly. The follow-
ing elements, all part of the BEHEIREN apparatus, make up the
bulk of the picture:
a) Hide-out: When EEHEIREN got hold of the four on
about 26 October, they had to be hiden out for the approximate
two week period until their exit from Japan could be arranged.
This presented BEHEIREN no great logistical problem. A number
of the BEHEIREN activist leaders have homes well suited to
harboring fugitives. For example, BEHEIREN activist leader
FUKASAKU Mitsusada has a villa hidden away in Chigasaki, which
was used on the night of 12 September for a meeting of about
20 top BEHEIREN leaders, and which would be highly suitable
SECRET
!

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Attachment No. 1.
Japanese Who Have Been Identified as
Active BEFEIREN Supporters or Sympathizers
1.) YOSHIKAWA Yuichi (BEHEIREN Secretary General)
member.
6.
- former JCP
ODA Makoto (BEHEIREN Chairman) popular novelist.
KAIKO Ren
Akutagawa prize winning növelist.
KUBO Keinosuke
film producer and director
TSURUHI Shunsuke Doshisha University professor.
TSURUMI Kazuko
-
☐☐
sister of Shunsuke (their father is the late
philosopher, Yusuke).
7. FURUYAHA Yozo high school teacher.
8. MUTO Ichiyo. ex-JCP (tried to travel to U.S. to represent
BEHEIREN at October 21 demonstrations this year, but was
denied a visa to enter the U.S.)
9. YAHADA Atsushi
-
10. FUKUDA Yoshiyuki
11. TOMINAGA Ichiro
12.
ex-JCP.
FUKASAKU Hitsusada
13.AWAZU Kiyoshi
14. TAKADO Kaname
15. YOSHIDA Kiju
16.
UMIHARA Shun
17. HASHIMOTO Mineo
18. HOTTA Yoshie
playwriter.
cartoonist.
professor.
graphic designer.
Christian leader.
film director.
writer.
Buddhist priest.
novelist.
19. GOTO Hiroyuki
20. KUWABARA Takeo
scientist.
professor at Kyoto University.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
O L G H
WE
24 Ľ
-5-
for hiding the four desorters. Other private-dwellings, be-
longing to BEHEIREN leaders and loyal supporters, are scattered
throughout both the Kanto and Kansai areas.
b) BEHEIREN/Soviet Liaison; BEBEIREN Secretary General
YOSHIKAWA has maintained periodic contact with Soviet Embassy
officials for years. BEHEIREN Chairman ODA has met Soviet
Peace Committed officials in Moscow. The exact means of how
this liaison was accomplished in this case is precisely known
from a covert phone tap on the Soviet Embassy's line. A full
transcript is available of two phone calls made on 30 October,
first by Brian Victoria to Chief Press Attache Nikolay V.
Vasilyevich, and second by YOSHIKAWA to First Secretary
Sergey D. Anisimov, urgently requesting a private meeting
later that day to discuss "an extremely important, extremely
delicate matter", without doubt the case of the four sailors.
c) BEŒIREN/U.S. Pacifist Liaison:
BEHEIREN contacted
Dartmouth University professor Ernest P. Young, who flew to
Japan on & November, apparently helped BEHEIREN leaders check
out the bona fides of the deserters, and returned to the U.S.
on 11 November. (Attachment 5 is the translation of a Sankei
Shimbun article, dated 21 November, reporting an interview
with Young, giving his version of his role in this case.).
5. Escape to Moscow: The four deserters turned up in
moscow on 20 November. The press has speculated widely and
unanimously that the four left Japan on the Soviet passenger
ship Baikal on 11 November. Again, there is no dissenting
opinion, overt nor covert. The only mystery concerning this
final phase of the Japanese portion of this case concerns the
mechanics of how the four boarded the Baikal and who assisted
in this maneauver. But with the sailing of the Baikal from
Yokohama, BEHEIREN completed its most highly successful and
beautifully executed activity in its 2 1/2 year history. Not
only did BEHEIREN smear the American Government's image in
Japan, not only did BEHEIREN gain a vast amount of priceless
publicity that will swell the ranks of its supporters and be
invaluable in future activities, but BEHEIREN doubtlessly
even made a profit, financially, on this low budget operation
donations are still pouring into BEHLIREN Headquarters from
all over Japan to "help and protect U.S. deserters"
V/PV
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
SAKAMOTO Yoshikazu
21.
22.EIDAKA Rokuro
-
SECRET
Assistant professor at Tokyo University.
professor at Tokyo University.
23. IIDA Mono – vriter.
employed at International House in Tokyo.
24. TSURUHI Yoshiyuki
25.
TERAI Hinako
26.
ANAI Fumihiko
27. NASU Masanao
28. MATSUMOTO Ichiju
29. FUKUTOMI Setsuo
30.
31.
KURIHANA Yukio
etc: ANDO Jimbei, CHIBA Hido, EGAWA Taku, FUJII Nittatsu,
HARIYU Ichiro, HOSHINO Yasusaburo, ICHII Saburo, IKEYAMA Juro,
ISHIDA Takeshi, KANAI Yoshiko, KASAI Seiichi, KATAGIRI Yuzuru,
KATO Shuichi, KAZAMA Michitaro, MATSUURA Sozo, KIDOKORO Hasao,
KITAKOJI Satoshi, KOBAYASHI Shoichiro, KOMATSU Sakyo,
KOBAYASHI Tomi, KUNO Osamu (Shu), KURODA Hidetoshi, MARUYANA
Hasao, MIDORIKAWA Torn, MIZUSAWA Yana, KORITAKI Ichiro,
MUCHAKU Seikyo, MURANATSU Hiro, NISHIO Noboru, NOMURA Koichi,
OGOSHI Terno, OTSUKOTSU Yoshiko, SERIZAWA Tae, SHIRAI Shimpei,
SHINMERA Takeshi, SHISHIDO Hiroshi, SUGIURA Mitsuo, SUGIYAMA
Tatsumaru, SUZUKI Masahira, TAKEUCHI Yoshitomo, WADA Nagahisa,
YAMADA Munemitsu, YAMADA Toshio, YAMAGUCHI Kosaku, YANANISHI
Klichi, YASUDA Takeshi, YOSHINO Gonzaburo, YOSHIWARA Koichiro,
OKAMOTO Taro, MATSUMOTO Seicho, EI Rokusuke, IZUMI Taku,
AWAYA Noriko, KATO Yoshiro, SHIROYAMA Saburo, TAKAHASHI
Taketomo, ODAGIRI Hideo, OKUMA Minoru, SANO Kenji, SUZUKI
Michihiko, KUBATA Hanya, SHINOHARA Seiei, MARUYANA Kunio,
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Attachment No. 2
Some BEREIREN Activities and Accomplishments
1. Regular once-per-month demonstrations at a public park in
Tokyo, consisting of anti-American speeches and followed by street
marches.
2. An all night TV "teach-in" with BEHEIREN activist leadors,
along with special guest, U. S. pacifist Carl Oglesby (Chairman of
the Students for a Democratic Society.)
3. A full page advertisement in the New York Times (16 November
1965), followed by another full page ad in the Washington Post
(3 April 1967), appealing to Americans to stop the war in Vietnam.
W
4. A "Meet in Conference of Two Nations for Peace in Vietnam,"
held in Tokyo in August 1966, and attended by BEHEIREN activists and
seven U.S. pacifist leaders (including Dave Dellinger), and observers
from France, England, Canada, the USSR, Pakistan, and Mongolia.
5. A mass meeting in Tokyo in October 1966, guest speakers of
which were French pacifists, Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir.
Nationwide tours of Japan for lectures and peace rallies for
such anti-Vietnen var pacifists as Professor Howard Zinn and the late
A. J. Huste of the United States, Claude Bourdet of France, and Thich
Nhat Crah of South Vietnam
6.
7. À mass meeting in Tokyo in January 1967, sponsored by
FEHEIREN and featuring U.S. folk singer and pacifist Joan Baez.
8. À continuing program of direct distribution of pamphlets to
U.S. troops stationed in Japan, and those coming to Japan on warships,
and for rest or hospitalization from VietnaE.
9. Participation by two BEHEIREN activist leaders (Kyoto
University professor KUWABARA Takeo and International House staffer
TSURUMI Yoshikyuki, taking advantage of a trip to the U.S. to attend
a non-political Japan-America Congress on Cultural Problems) in
anti-Vietnam war Speech rallies and demonstrations at Dartmouth
University in early May 1967, followed by an unsuccessful attempt
to invite Cassius Clay to visit Japan on behalf of HEHEIREN.
10. Continuing offorts to bring to Japan for a nationwide
SECRET

--- Image 104-10073-10279_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
CEGRET
TSURUSHIMA Setsurei, MURO Kenji, KONAKA Yotaro, SAKAMOTO
Yoshikazu, SAITO Masahiko, etc.
COMMENT: Although not recorded here, many of the above persons
are ex-JCP members.
SECRET