

--- Image 104-10217-10000_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10217-10000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CONSENTIAL
10 May 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
Cleard Joseph CHARLES
16
1. On 29 April 1963 Dorotha Matlack, Domestic Exploitation
Section, ACEI, telephoned to the effect that a banker med Clasará
Joseph Charles had left Haiti six days carlier and had just arrived
in New York. A friend of Charles, naked Joseph Dryer, 109 Lakewood
Avenus, West Falm Beach, Florida, had write to General Delmas,
former C Antilles Comand, recommending Charles as a nam of great
interest to the US overment in view of the events in Eaiti. Charles
vas described as President of the Bane Commercials, Port en Prince,
Haiti, he is in President Devalier's favor. Are. Matlack mentioned
that she had alarted Cal. Ga Kail in Kisad to contact Dryer in
arder to obtain more background information and em 093cement on
Charles.
2. On 1 May 63 Mrs. Matlack advised that Charise was staying at
the Park Sharutan Hotel, Ear Yesk, and that he had telephoned bar
since her name had been supplied to him by Dayer. Charles conad dared
her to be his point of contact in Washington. According to Mrs. Hatlank,
Charles had appointments to sae Vice President Jenson, Senator Kostings
and Congresku Engers (Florida). Essover, Qeries is willing to talk
to representatives of Nrw. Matlock's office. Hrn. Natlack stated that
the Battion Dack men in ACT was ready to go to New York to talk to
Caries and invited CIA to accompwy his. Campies speake very little
English and a fluency in French was therefore required for the inter
view. Mare. Natlack stated that the night to chle to obtain a French
lingmist frem First Away, Governor's Iaised, bild not be es
intelligmase officer. It was decided that Jeans Falog, Esw York
It was
Office, the has a knowledge of the French langage would adsengany
the ACSI represstative unter Army verás alsó ármunpad that
Balog would masat the ACSI representative (Captain Bogsta) at the Park
Sheraton Ental where Charles was staying.
c
3. On 2 Kay 63 Mrs. Matlack reported that Col. Kail had interviewed
Mr. Dryar in West Palm Beach. Dryer had appointed Charles es Director
of his bank in Haiti. Charles, according to Dryer, formerly had no
political ambitions but in view of the current political situation in
Haiti, Charles now thinks that he may some day be president. Dryer
described Charles as well-comected, politically and finacially, on
both sides of the fence in Haiti. Ha is also a good friend of President
Duvalier. Dryer had given Charles latters of introduction to Senator
Keating and to other officials in Washington. Charles vanted to see
President Kemedy and indized had gone to the White House to arrange
for an appointment. His was well received by the President's appoint-
ment secretary and invited to dimmer that evening with the appointment
L

--- Image 104-10217-10000_page_3.jpeg ---
14-000
_TIAL
-3-
:
1
SUBJECT
Claward Joseph CHARLES
&
7. I eat Mrs. Matlack in the lobby of the Hotel Willard shortly
before noon, and a few minutes later, Mr. Charias arrived, acompanded.
by Mr. and Mrs. de Mahrezschil48. He lunched in the restaurent in
the batal. Mr. Go Kehrenschilet rationed that he had been born in
Pata, Russia, but during the Balsevik Revolution had been taken to
Poland as a small child. He had spent expremimately 20 years in
Falend prior to World War II and had served in the Palish Amy.
Es also mentioned that be hai hasa a mmber of an ICA Feea to Yoga-
slavia in 1957 and while in Belgrade had not Ouilla who was visiting.
Belgrade at the thee. He had spoke to Commalle and was invited to
visit Paland, which invitation be had accepted. Els bone is in Dallas,
Duxss. He has a Ph.D. in geology and has had some tesebing experience.
Mrs. Go lohrenschilft was burn in Fairing, China. Her father was
Ression and her mother French, End she is shy or has been a fasaden
designer. Mr. de Nohrenschildt mentioned that he has knose Charles
for sometime and that be is a partner with him in a sical business
in Haiti.
&. Both Baries and de Namenschildt vare endless to arrange
meetings with government officials in Washington. I mentioned to
Charles that a meeting had been arranged fer him at 15 and that a
Kr. Green would met Mn in the lobby. At 1410 Ers. Matlock, Mr. and
Hrn. de Maigremschilft and I departed and Charles smained in the
Lobby waiting for contact.
9. In the course of the leashsen conversation, Charles had
mentioned to Kru. Matlach that be desired to as a Mr. Wiea, AID,
discuss 63 mid to Haiti. Later that afternoon Ers. Natlack called to
state that she had called the State Department to pass along Charise'
requent. Mr. Lesaraki (State) had called her beak to peso on the
Haitim Desk man's extreme displeasure that expone in the United States
Government should be in official contact with Charles. The task B
considered Chariss to be close to the Duvalier Coverment, to have
been involved in several shady financial dealings, and in general,
be an undesirable character. Mrs. Matlack naked whether the Agency
had any interest in Charles which would dictate further contact with
Charles.
10. Maye Sturts checked with NI Division and determined that as
a result of the meeting with Charles, the ED/P Fnition Desk had no
further plane to content him. I tald Mrs. Katleck that our interest
seamed to have been satisfied and that I balieved we shall dicoNGAN
cursalves as gressfully as possible.
ļ
:
;

--- Image 104-10217-10000_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
secretary.
Cunard JompÀ CHARLAS
Through a zianderstanding, however, Charles did not
attend the dimmer bunk vans to How York instead.
4. Charles is travelling, according to Dryer, with a Desam
geologist used da Nehrenschilét.
E
de Kebrunschilat is esencisted
with Charles in a business venture in Haiti sand is trying to armage
a meeting for Charles with Vice President Jabnson.
5. On 3 May 63 Jim Inlog telephoned to eĜving that he had had a
Sive-bour session the previous day with Charles and that he had
obtained both personality data and vices by Carles on what that)
United States should do in the current Initim aiuntio. Eleg
advised that he was transmitting the information to Kashington.
Upon arrival, exples of the talotypes were tranmitted to ACNI
(ftru. Matlack), M Rivision, and the Latin America Hywash.
Nayo
6. On 6 May 63 Mauro Stamta, Support Brunch, advised that ki
Division vishad to spack to Charles and Balog was ached to arrange
as appointment. Krs. Matlack talepiosed at approximately 171S to
advise that she had just received a telephone call from firs. do
Nohremschilft making eraistance in obtaining hotel reservations in
Washington. Upen being told that we had no special mums of obtain-
ing reservations, Mrs. Matlack stated that she would check with the
State Department Proteoal Office to determine võiah hotels vould
admit negro guests. Mrs. Matlock finally made reservations at the
Albam Tvers. A check with Jin Palog revealed that he had arranged
for Charles to meet the kil representative in the lobby of the Willard
Hotel, Washington, D. C., at 12:00 seem en ↑ Kay. Attempts to reach
Mrs. Entlack that afternes tere msurcessful. At 0850, 7 May, a
Y
call vas made to Mrs. Meatlook to confirm that Charles would be in
Kashington on that day and that arrungmevnte had been made for a =
meeting with an Agency representative for 12:00 noon. Mrs. Matlock
retorted that both Mrs. de Rebremschilds and Charles had called her
that previous evening to cénfim e lê00 Lehenmans spyciniment viik
her. Hrs. Matlack was concerned that CIA and Amy should not be
ves
working at esnes purposes. She had received authorization from
ACSI to most Charies at lisch and felt that it would not be palitie
for her to withdraw from har mypointsent sincs Any cassidered her
the point of castart with Charles. Mega Stunts informed W Divisim
of the conflies and prased in the repensties that the Wi Mvikia
representative might mest Charles and kra. Matinal at noon and that
Mrs. Entlock offered to withdrew shortly thereafter. *mm 27 repre-
sentative declined the offer and requested thest a moting later in.
the afternoon be arranged. Fre. Estleck believed that dan ta can-
Plisting instructions, abe had been placed in the midila in the
situsties from which she could not graciously withdraw and requested
that sexme occupany hor.
AL
!
www a
**

--- Image 104-10217-10000_page_4.jpeg ---
14-0'00
r
1
11. Wayne Belson, DD/P Coordinator, called on 7 May to inquire
He stated that ACSI
concerning our involvement in the Charles cass.
had called him earlier that day to assure him that ACSI had no direct
interest in Charles and that it was acting as an intermediary at the
request of General Delmar who had passed the lead to General Pitch.
ACSI vas concerned that due to the mix up in appointments to see
Charles, charges might later be made that ACSI had interferred or
I explained to Helson what
had obstructed CIA contact with Charles.
had happened and he later called back to state that ACSI was completely
satisfied in the way the matter had been handled.
12. On 8 May Mrs. Matlack telephoned to advise that the Operational
Branch of ACRI was discussing the Charles case with DD/P to deterd.no
was still easmhat ecucerned over her ova
future course of action.
position in the case since Charles considered her to be the focal point
in Washington. I reiterated to her that the matter vas one for either
the State Department or the operational elements to handle and that
Are. Matlack mentioned that a
we preferred to disengage ourselves.
dispatch had been received to the effect that a cousin of Charles was
promniently mentioned as a successor to Duvalier should the latter
be overthrown. She was of the opinion that the Un government should
continue to "play ball" with Charles as a future asset in Haitien
affairs.
Distribution:
C546
1
•
✓
-
1
1
->>
I
-
0/Cates
New York Office
Suppport (Stunts)
LA Breach
Index (Control)
Dep/Call chrono
AFCzajkowski: acr
:
A. F. CZAJKOWARKI
10
TH