

--- Image 104-10250-10199_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10250-10199
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Deruty Chief, SSD
FROK
SUBJECT:
Chief, Special Referral Branch
HIDALGO, Balmes, Jr.
#65077
22 June 1951:
L
☐☐
STST
The Subject is a covert employee of this Agency now in the
United States for four weeks training and being considered for
vos by Staff C/ICB in a highly sensitive assignment. Immigration
authorities may submit questions through this Agency which will
be answered by the Subject, but requests to have the Subject tes-
tify in open court hearings must be refused.
DETAILS
1. Reference is made to the letter received by the Alien
Affairs Staff from the Immigration and Naturalization Service
and reference to your request of 15 June 1954 to ascertain the
details of the Subject's status with this Agency and prepare a
reply to I&NS.
2. On 17 June 1951 Special Agent Chester R. HOADS of this
office interviewed Mr. Robert DAHLGREN, Acting Chief, WH/FI, Room
112Ɛ "T" Building, and 3 (John BONNET) Chief, WH/Panama, Room
2204 Quarters "I", x4156, regarding the Immigration request. The
following information was obtained during this interview.
2. The Subject is still a covert employee of this Agency,
is now in the United States (New York City) on home leave, and
is scheduled to report to Washington, D.C., to commence four
weeks of covert trainingon 6 July 1954.
b. The Subject is presently under consideration by Staff
C/JCB for an assignment with a highly sensitive project under
the supervision of Staff C/ICB. Under this proposed assign-
ment any publicity or notoriety that the Subject would receive
from testifying publicly on questions of Communist associations
of which he may have knowledge would ultimately preclude his
future use with the Staff 0 project and would probably jeopar-
dize his future as a covert employee of this Agency.
46
Panama
c. If the Staff Cassignment, does not materialize, the
Frbject will return to Canal one) on approxi-
nately 15 August 1954 as a case officer, and this position
would also be jeopardized by undue publicity.
2/

--- Image 104-10250-10199_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
03
sidere
that
7.
After his conversation with Mr. HOGAN, N. PENNINGTON
thet a refusal of the IBS request would not be cor-
out of order, but recommeord-d' cooperating to the extent
could submit specific questions to this Agency which
could be preserted to the Subject and the answer forwarded to
The refusel of their original request should be based on
the sensitivity of the Subject's position which could be jeopar-
dired b Fry urdue publicity and also tix frot that the Sub-
s frequently and it would be difficult to locate him
ant contact was
15. James SFROUS, lien Iffcire Staff/SC, stated on 18
June 1961 that Mr. HOGAN, Special ssistant to the Commissioner
of In mation and Naturalization, had indicated in a conversation
mich SPROVEL on 8 June 19th that INNS had been able to locate
S
the Subject's location and affiliation with this Agency through
the Pubfootle father who told the inspector that the Subject was
this Agency in Ealboa, Panama Canal Zone,) which appears
security flap on the part of the subject's father.
Mr.
(John B) Chief, WH/Panama, was recontacted on 16
T
1:FL and informed of the nature of the NE recuest and also
of the apparent security flap on the part of the Subject's
father.on the basis of this further information, it was suggested
to r. (2 that the T&NS authorities be requested to submit any
cuestions through this 'gency which would, in turn, be presented to
the Subject and his answers be returned to JIIIS. fr.③NET) agreed
to the proposal of having the T&NS people contact the Subject
through this Agency and also indicated that the reported security
breach on the part of the Subject's father would be taken into
consideration and an attempt would be made to determine the extent
of the Subject's relatives or acquaintances know of the Subject's
employment by this Agency. CE:CE:CE:D:D:D:D:aul FIRKE) Staff C/ICB, also
3
-greed to the proposed procedure and requested that any and all
Action taken be coordinated with NH and Staff C.
ACTION
It is recommended that the attached memorandum to IANS and to
the Chief, WH Division, with a carbon copy to Staff C/ICE, be for-
werded and that no further action be taken pending a report from Mr.
regarding the seriousness of the security flap from an oper-
National standpoint.
Attachments
Warles
Hane
-
1 Letter to IANS
1
-
Letter to WH with cc to Staff C/ICE
GIN
HOATRON/ml
6/21/51
-
-

--- Image 104-10250-10199_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
GINU
Q.
03m)
3. th. Driftart and th. (:1): -) indicated that from a WH
Mr. GRET
standpoirt orly there would be ro objection to a controlled inter-
view the foot if the interview could be afforded the Sub-
ject while he is sti11 1: ew York Ci
This, however, would
have to be coordinated with Staf
for possible objections
that they might raise in view of their proposed use of the Sub-
ject.
rerested that he be informed of any action
taker in this matter and any public testimony or oper court tes-
timony would have to depend or the seriousness of the case being
prepared by the Immiratior authorities.
1. Any contact with the Subject during his period of covert
training from 6 July to approximately 15 August 1954 would have to
also be coordinated with r. (Feter HOCHL) Covert Training Officer,
OTH, whose office is located in Building T-31.
On
June 29 Special Agent HOATSON contected Mr. (
(Faul
FURKE) Staff /ICE, 1613 "I" Building, x668, to discuss the Sub-
ject's future position and also the request received from INS.
The following factors were obtained from Mr.(BIRKE)
03
03
a. The Subject's use in the proposed Staff C project is
still in the planning stage, but the assignment that the Sub-
ject is being considered for is a highly sensitive one and
any further publicity which the Subject may receive would
ultimately disqualify him for consideration on this project.
b. Any approval for ILNS contact of the Subject would
have to be determined after carefully considering the impor-
tance of the TNS case for which the Subject's testimony may
be required. ::P3 (FURKE) indicated that the Subject could still
be considered as an employee of
an employee of WH Division regardless of whe-
ther or not the proposed Staff C/TCB assignment materializes
and any action in the request received from IONS should be
closely coordinated with both Staff C and H.
6. Mr. PENNINGTON, Alien Affairs Staff, SO, contacted William
A. HOGAN, Special Assistant to the Commissioner of Immigration and
Naturalization on 18 June 1954 requesting further information re-
garding their memorandum of 9 June 1954 on the Subject. Mr. HOGAN
explained that I2NS has a list of possible informants which contains
the Subject's name. The people on this list are being contacted for
use on a continuing besis wher specific cases arise which night
fall in their particular area of knowledge. At the present time
IANS has no specific case for which they want to contact the Subject,
but they just want to know if he would be available in the future
for use as ar informert regarding various Communist activities of
which the Subject has personal knowledge.
- 2 -