

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
Ste
SEGUIT
- 2 -
I
-
-
-
In view of the vast amount of work that must be done,
16 and 17 May
suggested that I plan to spend two days
if it becomes necessary. On previous trips to discuss
TENIAULT's mission with her, I found that she frequently
had other commitments which made it difficult to cover
adequately the material which I had amassed. If this is the
case on this trip, I should prefer not to press her. One
day's latitude seems the better part of wisdom. CREA-5
agreed. We shall see, however.
10) In the event that it becomes necessary to reach me,
suggest that my wife be asked to get in touch with me
66 (Jackson 7-7018)) and that I be asked simply to call my
In New York is QELHAM 8-253008
office. I will then call on the sterile phone. For the
record, my telephone number
SECRET
Pertram Cooper
0}
UPE CARD REPRODUCTIONS

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_1.jpeg ---
10000
104-10071-10122
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
VLA
t
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
DISPATCH NO. (HBDA)-186
zz
DATE 14 May 1955
TO
Chief, FORA
FROM
Decrets
CLASTERATION
12-22
Senior R
Representative, (New Delhi)
Operational/ INTEL
$
GENERAL
SUBJECT:
SPECIFIC
(PARLIPPER
02
Transmittal of Reporte
3P
30 Prenssitted herewith are copies of THEIR LAULT roperts and notes
as listed below. Not included are carbon copies of the initial report
(plans undated) and the report covering the period 28 December
as the third copy was not mado.
->>>
14 January
2. THERIAULT requested that, if possible, a set of his report be
made available to him on his return to facilitate preparation of a master
report on overall findings and impressions.
Enclosures Under separate cover
(Pouched 7 May 1955)
Thomas V. LUND
-84 Jan
23 Jan
25 Jan
30 Jan
30 Jaa 8 Feb
- Bob
-
-
17000
18 Fob (1 FP)
20 Feb 4 Mar
Distribution:
✓ W
7
Har
18 Mar 16 Mar
-⭑
18 Mar - 30 Mar
Interview with U.S. DABAR,
8 Ap
Notebook
12 Apr
Her
Orig & 4 m
9 Kay 55
2
-
Ne
Filos
JOB #
5
02
Tres Project (PA) FLIPPER
C NE
Fold: # 3
E
17
NICATION
FORE GO
GAR. 1949 51-28 A
EU
DERI
8915
AFCITURE CARD„REPRODUATIO

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
14 May 1955
T.:
Ireliminary Debriefing
13 May 1995, 2030-2130.
1. Frior to my departure for New York to handle the preliminary
debriefing of THERIAULT, I discussed the following subjects with CNEA-5:
1) In view of the fact that THERIAULT's expenses on her recent
trip to India have been greater than was anticipated, 11,000
allitional funds have or are to be shortly deposited to her bank.
This will be done by sterile check. It is to be accounted for
under the terms of the original contract.
2) T
CNEA-5 suggested that take her reports up with me for
possible annotation and expansion. Upon examination on 14 May,
this appears unfeasible in view of the fact that there are CIA
comme indicators and RI symbols attached directly to the reports, _
3) CNEA-5 surrested that I pursue with THERIAULT the
possibility of developing an interest in Krishna Menon, utilizing
This
a cleared publisher who could request Menon to write a book.
a proach to be based on Menon's acute susceptability to flattery.
4) CNEA-5 suprested that THEM LAULT be asked to review the
areas of her influence in order to lay the groundwork for an
official invitation to visit this country being extended to the
Trime Minister in the future. He suggested Sen. George and
Chester Bowles as possible points of departure.
5) THERIAULT is to be informed that her reports have been
of in measurable assistance to the Ambassador and to the U.S.
Government vis-a-vis policy planning for India.
6) THERIAULT is to be asked to come to Washington for a day
or se in the very near future for further debriefing. This is
to be arranged at her convenience.
7) In view of the fact that THERIAULT has been unwitting
of the Agency's role in sponsoring her trip, I suggested that I
It
now make her witting in terms of the security involved.
seemed advisable to me since it is likely that there will be
future contacts with THE RIAULT. CNEA-5 agreed to this.
8) THERIAULT is to be advised that she is at liberty to
discuss any and all aspects of her trip with anybody with the
eception of the Agency's role in sponsoring it.
02
Removed from Project (PA)FLIPPER
CS Classificati
SECRET JONG
JCB #66-66
BOX:
5
Foldy #3
FERTURE CARD REPRODUCTIONS
i
_

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000.
2,
30
Jeneral Comments.
up
N
22
duplicate
I have not talked with my Ford Foundation people and many
TON people, An impressed by their quality. They are working
hard and are doing it in a solf-08800ing zanger I have not heard
one criticien of t from anybody. There are a few ends, of cour
I have not yet not the. They are here to help India carly cut
her projects and her ideas" no one put it. And they se to
not only democrationaly but with a very real warmth and
Byapathy
yet they stay quietly in the background and take none
of the credit. But I foal more strongly each week I on here
that the work is solid and is having tremendously good off est in
The
relieving tension and hostility between the two countric.
results of the notual work are apparent now and hope has recently
When
increased among Indiana; Also their self-confidence.
confidence increm 08, sensitiveness decrenses, of course.
*
From all I have picked up, the feeling is widesprend that
Ambreendor Allen did - good job out here. As one put 18, "he
was exactly right for the period he was here; just no Bowles
was right for the special permixim problems of his two years.
Both Indian and Americ-ns highly raise both men.
We have a prize in Evelyn Hersey and somebody should thank God
every night that she is here. She and Dand uriner are
the slaved ericans in north India, certainly.
Evelyn Hersey in nown throughout India. She was Social Welforo
atticho at the Inbreey beginning I think in 1943. The only one
attached to any embrasy anywhere, I understand. Her fork ECJ
to interpret the social changes taking place in India; to besand
sware of the needs and problems and how these needs and probl
were being net; and to offer her services and her experience
whenever or wherever it was asked for. When the administration
changed, she was dismissed by Republican on the grounds that this
BAG A new idea; nobody else had ever done such a thing, that is
no other foreign service and so why should the U.S.A At Hr.
Allen's urgent insistence, she was sent back, this time under
the mogla of Tal- Sho is, however, doing the same job. EC
influence is very wide; cho to sdaired and loved by literally
thousands of Indians from the high echolons down to the ovespera
and ther horijans. the in called on for vice in to crome
fields and by very high officials. She works behind the ecca as
and fools that her work would be ruined were she given credit
for what she has actually done. she is vivid and full of life
and one would hardly all her self effacing; and yet her wor
is done almost anonymously. I have been around her enough to see
how wido her circle of Indian friends is; and how comptantly.
and continuously they stream through her house, Sho goes all ove
Indie. Has travelled much more than 100 thousand miles. She ong
in recent months she ha felt absolutely no entegonia toward her
CG on Amerio,n. She is shrewd, has cherp eyce and care; 13
knowleable politically; is nobody's fools is strongly anti-
communist; is wormbe rted and intellectually flexible.
xible.
the best sinds I have run into since coming out
.
One 08
B
I wish to had five times the people in TCM. They carefully
Wold politics. I think it
I think it is vise.
n
and thy
02
& PA FLIPPER
assificationANONG
Peenvad frcz ProJoot
JUD066-668759
Boxt
Polds #3
5
11BDA-186)”
SHOLLSAGO!

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
Genera. Comments. (continued.)
AH.(NODA.) 1865
22
5.
6
A very good project has recently been launched. It is
crlled The Delhi Training and orientation Centre for
Foreign Technici: ne in Indio. This is the second time it
has been held, I think. It begins today, Jan. 24. Contimes
for two weeks. (The first one worked out a fine short
bibliography on India; and a littic brochure on "Foods
available in North India.) This second course covers
the Indian village, with visits out to villages; Indian
prohitecture, dance; Indian history; religion; Ielam
in India; other religions and philosophies; Indian family
life and customs; Health problems and rea úroca; educational
problems urban problems; rural unemployment and a1d; the
role of foreign aid in India; discussion of the Five Year
Plan.
art
who are we to S. Funn
coming to
It is the kind of briefing that every foreign we were
It is open to ell of the
etc.
sleo Dr. Douglas
invited simply es guests and shall attend many of the meetings.
Pilns are shown; trips to art galleries and museums
Miss Hersey has had much to do with this; sleo Dr.
Esminger. And probably others, too. Indians will do most
of the briefing.
I shall write later about the Five Year Plan. Am still
studying it. Shall have a number of interviews with the
planners, or with a few of then. Shall also go out on several
of the projects. This seems important to me for social
changes and how they are made breed politics. The political
picture on certainly not be understood if the cultural and
social pictures are not studied and analysed carefully.
We e
·re enclosing few excerpte of epoches made
A
Mr. Nehru, Mr. Menon, and Mr. Uber this past week at the
Gongress Purty big gathering,
4
I

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000.
C
AH(NODA) 1865
22
:
i
1.
04
2.
8.
Odds and Ends of Information;
0501
0
Hy Plob, told me that the Communists are organising the
domestic workers of New Delhi Lest weak there was a
moeting of nyphs at India Onte onlled together for this
pur 300, The week before the bearers (or the sweepore)
were called together. The Comuniste are going about it in
a broad ways making very reasonable demands, such as a half
day off each week, a rise of perhaps 4 or 5 rupees a month
in wages.
A Communist in every home will really be somethings
8
Hey there is little ectivity of Congress party or Socialist
party among 1-bor groups. The work is being done by
Conturists. They, somehow, have the money to do thes
organisational work while there is little money among regular
workers due to weakness of industry, small number and low wage
of the workers, de He is troubled over lack of activity
acɔng the decoritie groups in labor circles. Says he has been
here only 3 months and ornnot ca yet see the picture alearly.
-
Ho
over
La
The State Dept.'s coldness about pernitting dies to visit
the iraca in China give the U. S. a very bad press out here.
It whe very clover strategy on the part of China; it was bed
strategy on our part to appear callous to the feelings of the
fasilies. Family affection runs deep out here. It is another
one of our many small blunders which sonchow loom so large
when viewed by the hundreds of millions out here., If, comehow,
88
everybody could count up to ten before speaking, and think not
how China is going to take it but how the entire ares of asia
Will repot. Those families could have been told quietly and
personelly that if they wanted to go they would not be protected
by on Americen prosport; they could even have been accretly
urged not to go; but the blatant press relosse. • Forgive 67
editorialising, I am sure I am not supposed to do it, 103 Cao is
very close here to the mind and heart of Asia and on foot help
Doing aware of these reactions of the peoplo. Anyone who loves
the U. S. cannot help but wish that our spoliesen would speak
core costly and wore thotfully. A braggert or bull,
A braggart or bully to dialized
17 all husen beings. To have strength is fine; to treadish that
trength offends.
The Place of India (Jan. 26) has excellent editorial on the
socialistic society goal as outlined by thru and Congress Party
leaders. *DoG3 Avadi mark a revolutionary shift in Congress poli
All that it meant was on acknowledgment of the Umveasingl
important role of the public sector in the national canayo
role that was already defined with greater precision in the
Industrial policy resolution. There was nothing to indiesto £438
there would be any new encroachment on the opbare reserved to
private enterprise, and the fears expressed cutside the Goagreas
on that score were therefore, unjustified.
therefore, unjustified. Beither too &
any justification for the apprehension that the new objective
meant a radical departure from the Seveda deal.
Mazy
6323
mattered really was not the label that was given the need
hat the extent to which in actual practice it would help in
the production of greater wealth and in its more equitable
distribution.
What was significant
was that it obould
ATURE CARD REPRODUCTIONS

--- Image 104-10071-10122_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
odda hnd enda of inforant on (cont.)
C
?
Att. (NCDA) 1865
the
have been compelled at this stage to seek a more popular label
for its moononio and social podioics..
If this commitment is to
be more than a design to steal the opponents' alcatoral thunder,
Congress Governments at the Centre and in he states havo
immediately to set about the task of translating the new prinsiples
into policica. . . The only way to make the policy of Congreac
Governments accord with Congress principles is self criticism and
yet there were responsible Congressmen at Avadi who sQW
danger even in the condemnation of malpractices by congrassasa,
The road to full employment for which the Congress has
for the first ting laid down a time-limit
e
is by no means easy.
It demands a compacte renovation of life in the countryside on the one
hand and speedy industrialisation making the country as self-
sufficient ne possible on the other. (etc.)
Digest of
SAREES STUDahmith's speech on Jan, 24th.
De spoke of the unsuitability of totalitarianism in the dessoratle
Republic of India and the ing doguncy of capitaliem, stating that
there was left only P Socialistic approach open to the country.
He states that the accept,pce of the Socialistic society no ideal
meant the nationalisation of institutions that could be indiately
nationalised with „dvantage. The presumption in so doing, Gaid
Ur. Geshmath, was that socialised production would be more
profitable. He, however, cautioned that if experience belied that
view, the stop hight have to be retr,cod.
0
Do stated that a Socialistic ideal which roseived the support
of the people could Achieve the two objectives of increasing
national income and enhancing individual dividend.
He stated that Indie bed established economic stability though
at a rather low lovel of prosperity during the first Plan period.
[lo cald the credit for the schipset out at marely to economic
management and planning but included other fac among the
accistance from friendly nations. The United States, he said,
had contributed the largest share of foreign Qld.
Apexitis.
Removed from Project (PA) FLIPPER
CS Classification: NONE
JOB #66-6687.
Boxu
Folah 3
Wiss sindi and ur. Haden (private secretary of Mrs. Geadhl'e
and reception clark at Prime Minister's Bouse) over a oday
cup of tea in their quarters told the following story:
While in China, at first big banquet given them, Ir. I and
his doughter (and others) were served tiny baby live nice
dipped in honey. Uro. Gandhi (his daughter) was so shocked
that the cheddared at the sight and turned 2007. Eone of them
could eat the delicacy. It was not ever ecived again to the
while they were in China.
RDMERHODUCTIONS