

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
July 8,1952
Note: Nelson please deliver this to Allen.
To:
Allen Dulles
You recently asked me for our views on Yugoslavia.
The enclosed memorandum 10 a consensus formed from
all of our key staff members. It also meets with
the approval of John Hughes. I think this is a fair
statement of what we are doing to date and what our
views are. I hope this will be of some use to you.
Scanned
:
:
"
!
Enclosure
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_100.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECURITY INFORM
22 July 1952
MEZIORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENC
SUBJECT:
CIA Investigation of Relations
PROBLEM
It is likely that at a moeting you will hold Monday, 5 August,
with members of the Board of Directors of the National Culttoo for
a Froo Europe, these Directors will maintain they do not wish to dign
or to accept a directive and/or agreement as to relations between
NCFE and CIA, which has been approved by the CIA administrative staff
and the International Organisations Division of CIA.
DISCUSSION
.
At the time responsibility for CIA dealings with NCFE was trans-
ferred to the IO Division, a survey was undertaken by this Division
Dio
with the help of the CIA administrative staff under Mr. Wolf.
following was found to be the status of relations between CIA and
NCFE:
1.
Budget and Financial Relations.
i
8. No orderly subed ssion of budgetary requirements on the
For example,
part of NCFE has ever been established or practiced.
the CIA approved budget for the fiscal year 1952 was substantially
different than the budget upon which NCFE based its activities.
Bad commardcation has existed.
b. CIA has not exercised any form of control over NCFE
axpenditures after initial approval. For example, NOW has been
free to mitch funds allocated for one project to soce new
project or to pay for extending an old one ad thout further
reforence to CIA.
0. Monies raised by NCFE through the Crusade for Freedom
or monies advanced by CIA and unspent at the and of the fiscal
year have not been considered in the granting of funds for a
new fiscal year.
BECNET
:
i
!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10225-10000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
THIS PORTMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.
RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES &
DISPOSITION SECTION, RM FISER, ON OR BEFORE
DATE INDICATED.
A-50
IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION 4:18.
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
:M
1790 use PREVIOUS FIITIONe.
3
2024
Seccoci cn/110
S. Corbat
OG/EFK
RETURN TO
GP-50
--
73
(47)
DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.
78-112.9
432373
Speed 314576
FILE NOWashCIA AD 37
DOCUMENT:
FOLDER:
PAGE:
BOX:
IP/ARD
Rm 68-58
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
☐ SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
☐
☑
482373
CMMEDIATELY AFTER OSE
UMI TO RECORES CENTIOR
JED,
di
☑
.7
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
2
UNCLASSIFIED
1
faider #
1
i
NCFE
July1951-December 1952

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_102.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
CRE
-3-
the conduct of relations betwdon CA and NCFE. This agrement pro-
vides the followings
Q. Adequate budget information upon which to evaluato
the purposes and probable success of proposed NGFF activities
as well as adequate financial reporting system by NCFE so
that this Agency can at all times be aware of and insure the
approved expenditure of funds by NOVE.
D.
Adequate cecurity arrangements so that every employee
of NCFE has been given a security clearance necessary for the
proper protection of this operation.
C.
Watson
The 10 Division is to be the sole channel of
by NCFE to 24 and the State Department. The purpose of this
provision is to insure adequate preparation and consistant
policy guidance for NCFE in all its varied activities and to
afford a single point of liaison and coordination with Stato
Department and the area divisions of ⱭA. It is by no.moens
intended to prevent officials and directors of NCFE from dis-
cussing problems with higher authorities and in fact the IO
Division can give policy guidance without reference to
higher authorities. In the past, however, NCFE has conducted.
liaison with many of the area divisions in CA, ad to the State
Department and with various officials in CIA, and there has
been a resultant confudon.
d. The agrequent provides for the subudssion of monthly
reports by do to the status of its substantive activities.
4. Attitudes of NCFE.
The basic attitudes of NCVE about themsolves is armed up
by the comments on the first draft of the above-mentioned agreement
by Spencer Phenix,
a.
Our friends can refuse to supply funds for disapproved
activities but cannot legally or properly be given the 'right
to disapprove or modify any activities or require abandonment,
modification, or change in emphasis, in any of the existing
programs'.
b. "Again, no agreement between our friends and ourselves
can legally diminish our corporate right to spend our corporate
funds.
}
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_101.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRE
-
2
d. When budgets have been presented by NCFE, they have
not been presented with reasonable thoroughness or accuracy
nor have they indicated expenditures which are masonably
certain and those witch are projections of possible activities
for which NCFE has nevertheless asked for funds.
0. In cortain instancos, 1.0. grants to certain national
councils, NCFE makes expenditures for which there is no adequate
accounting to NCFE and on which the Committee has had littlo
or no infomation on how the money is spent.
2. Financial Reporting.
2. It is unquestioned that the internal business and
accounting procedurns of NCFE are excellent. However, adequa to
financial information has not been presented to CIA.
:
:
3. Security.
As the recent case of Leland Stowo indicatos, NCFE has
disregarded essential security considerations in the hiring of
personnel. Neither the Security Officer, WA, nor any other
branch or component of CIA, has anything but extremely inado-
quate information as to who is on the NCFE payroll.
C.
Policy Control.
In its relations with omigres through its National
Councils Division and in its radio broadcasts through RFE,
NCFE has in many cases not received adequate guidance from CIA
and the State Department and in some instances not followed
the guidance provided. CIA is seldom informed by NCPE of its
proposed activities other than in its over-all budgetary
presentation.
d.
Coordination of CIA Activities with NCFE.
NCFE's activities in radio broadcasting, which account
for three-quarters of its yearly budget, are almost entirely
transferred overseas. The action of its 1400 or more overseas
personnel often cut across CIA's own field operations. NCFE
has not accepted coordination in this field.
3. To Division and Administrative Staff Proposed Actions to
Solve These Difficulties.
The IO Division with the assistance of the CIA Administrative
Staff has prepared a memorandum of agreement to serve as a guide in
SECGET
5

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_103.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 4
+
It is unacceptable that private consent of CA
should be required as to the appointment of new directors
and officers.
a. The money given to NCFE by CIA is given first to
the 1848 Foundation and tide money is then donated to BCFE.
CIA therefore has no right to inquire into policies or
expenditures although "normally wo would consult our friends",
5. Basic Attitude of CIA.
CIA has a duty and responsibility to insure affirmatively
the conduct of the NCFF progrma in accordance with the 21 mission
and with the DCI's responsibility to igher authority. ▲ couren of
action based upon the view that NCFE's autonomy is such that it
cannot accept the above-mentioned agreement, or some form thereof,
might under conceivable circumstances, i.e. a change in the row
point of the German Covernment where most of NCFE's employses aro
located, the possibility of high-lovel changes in NCFE, or the
growing insistence on the part of the exiles for armed liberation,
lead to action not consistent with the DCI's responsibility.
At
present a situation exists in which CIA and the Division charged
with CIA responsibility cannot exercise that responsibility.
6. Recommendation.
The PRC has reviewed this agreement and has refused to
approve the budget of NCFM until this agreement or a notification
acceptable to NCFE is adopted. The Director has approved this
decision and it is suggested that he stand upon it.
CIO: TWB/eh
Orig ADD/A (for DDCI)
1 cc
-
->
1 cc - IO/TONIC
1 cc - CIO
2 cc - RI
L. K. WHITE
Acting Deputy Director¨
(Administration)
-

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_104.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
CONFIDENTIAL
Security Information
4-34
:
:
ER-3-1369
29 July 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations
Deputy Director Central Intelligence
FROM:
Attached is a memorandum which was handed me by
Spencer Phonix covering a confidential report made by..
two NCFE people with regard to NCFE's action in connection
with refugees. I have not read this in full and would like
your recommendation and analysis so as to spare me this if
possible.
Encl.
CORNBENTIAL
ALLEN HUUDULL bas
ALLE
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_107.jpeg ---
14-00000
A/
1
:
i
-3-
Councils or Committees, the idea being that the National Councils
should themselves undertake such activities in order to gain for
themselves the necessary standing in their respective emigrations.
This was not altogether inconsistent with NCFE's policy of emphasis
upon direct ssistance only to the intellectual and political elite,
but was a subsequent development thereof.
The most ambitious and long-lived of these National Councils'
refugee projects has been the Refugee Service of the Hungarian
National Council, which is the best and almost sole surviving
example of NCFE's origin 1 theory. The record, however, even of
"
More
this prize example, is an extremely spotty one (detalls to follow
in a descriptive report to be submitted separately).
importantly, the resons for the spottiness of the C's record
are not all attributable to the HNC itself; many, indeed, ure
due to the situation in which the HCN's approach to the refugee
problem, which has provided financial support, but little or no
guidance or moral support. Tas bud to
sw has bud to operate and ethiny
In the Rumanian case, NCFE's support for refugee activities
was originally channeled through the Rumanian National Council,
which ceased to enjoy NCFE recognition in 1950. Since that time,
NCFE support for Rumanian refugee activities has been given to
Rumanian elfure, Incorporated, an organimation entirely outside
the National Council category, and which includes Americans on
its Board of Directors.
In the Czechoslovak case, NCPE has channeled its support for
refugee activities through the Council of Free Chechoslovakia, a
National Council, which was the victim of a political split
lasting from January 1951 until July 4y 1952.
Free Czechoslovakiu, in turn, channeled some of this support to
The Council of
an organization which enjoys the status of voluntary agency, the
American Pund for Czechoslovak kefugees. This organization,
like Rumanian Welfare, Inc., includes Americans on its Board of
Directors, which is chaired by Professor James Shotwell.
Rumunian Welfare, however, the AFCR in Germany and Austria received
Unlike
from IRC or ICG and USCOA facilities and/or financial support
as did other larger orginizations such as the NCWC, the Lutherun
World Pederation, the World Council of Churches, the American
Joint Distribution Committee, etc. which shared with it the status
of voluntary agency. There is no doubt that Czechoslovak refugees
have been, to some extent, the victims of the political fluctua-
tions of their leadership in the 0.3., and that, in sense, NCPE
must also accept some responsibility for allowing the political
situation to have had repercussions of this nature.
In the case of the Albanians, no specific sums in the budget
(which has been provided by NCFE) of the National Committee for a
Free Albania have been earmarked for aid to Albanian refugees;
although despite this the NCFA has, it is reported, due chiefly
to close American supervision in home, managed to do more for
Albanian refugees in Italy than other National Councils, as for
instance the HC and BNC in Italy.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_106.jpeg ---
14-00000
-2-
the countries whence the refugees flee, RFE could also ignore
the presence of the refigees in the West. This, however, is
no longer the case.
Fundamentally, any NCFE interest in the European refugee
situation is an aspect of the general NCFE relationship with
exiles. In the changed European situation in which this inte-
rest is and will be manifested NCPE should reconsider its basic
instruments for such relationships: the National Councils.
Thoir exceptions, gaps, and shortcoming should be carefully
unalyzed and the conclusions dran therefrom, The inadequacy
of the National Councils as basic Instrument in the changed
situation in Europe will be indicated in this report. Certain
ad ptations of this instrument and the creation of new ones
will be required if NOVE is to carry out its functions and
realize its potentialities.
.
•
II
-
HY NCFE IS CNC NED IN HE EUROPEAN
REFUGEE PROBLANA (ND) HY THIS
SHOULD BY PROPERLY
MANIFESTED.
EACTIV-LY
A. The Extent of NCFE'a Concern to Date :
In the past NCP hus not directly concerned itself with
the over-all problem of refugees from behind the Iron Curtain.
This policy of NOPE has manifested itself in the following ways.
NCFE has consistently made it clear that its chief interest lies
in what it regarded as the political and intellectual elite of
enigrations from the various Iron Curtain countries. Certain
elements of this political and intellectual olite, however,
realized the necessity and the importance of channeling some
of their activities toward the mass of their respective emigra-
tions on a national basis. This realization was dictated either
by humeniturian or strictly re-listic political principles, or
by a combination of the two. Accordingly, these elements of the
elite approuched NCFE with their proposals for NCFE material and
moral support of such activities. These proposals differed widely
and were implemented at varying periods over the last three
ers, with the result that presently NCFE is innirectly supporting
refugee activities on a national basis at an annual amount of
$118,168.00, and with the further result that these activities
ure confused, haphazard, erratic, ill-coordinated and unjustly
and inexplicably disproportionate. Some nationality groups,
as for instance the Hungarians, have been receiving relatively
large amounts for refugee activities, with other groups, as for
example the Foles, who have a large emigration, receiving nothing.
'
The vehicles for the channeling of this support have also
differed widely. Originally, NCPE 's theory in providing supporty
for such activities was ba ed upon the existence of National
"

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_105.jpeg ---
14-00000
':
I
July 15, 1952
Revised July 20, 1952
."
SITUATION
JANCHE APPACTC TO THE EUROMESH REFUGEE SITUATION
1 -
INTRODUCTION
Reduced to its simplest terms, the sur pean refugee
problem can be resolved, saving liboration, only by the assi-
milation, or at least the integration of the refugees into the
countries which receive ther or by their emigration to countries
better able to co GO.
international programs vast
00 National and
in scope and cost are required for these purposes, and it is
obviously not within NCP's power or interest to ene directly
in them. But, in an indirect way, while paying atto tion only
to its direct and fundamental interests, NCFE can contribute to
the success of both types of programs, at least so far as they
concern refugees from the ten NCFE countries.
The first step is, of course, for NCFE to analyze its
position in relation to the European refugee situation and to
formulate a policy accordingly. HOPE has been a constantly
and rapidly growing organization, fully occupied with the imme-
HOPE
diate problems of expansion which hive confronted it.
120 been deprived of the opportunity to pause and consider the
consequences of its expansion in changed situation, much less
to dell with these consequences.¦
Several basic factors have combined to alter NCFI's position
While IRO
in relation to the European refuge situation.
operated, NCFE was in a position to make a distinction between
the exile elite and the mess of refugees, who were under the
protection of the IHO in Europe. IC, however, ceased to exist
at the beginning of 1952. 1H0's several successor organizations
have yet to prove their ability effectively and completely to
perform its functions. During the early youre of NOFE's exis-
and
tence, the frontier countries, Germany, Austria, and Italy,
the intermediary receiving countries, France and Britain, were
absorbed in post-war reconstruction or subjected to military
occupation and hence were generally not in a position to take an
active interest in the refugees as an instrument of their foreign
un
policies. NCFE in the U.S., therefore, could afford to ignore
most developments of exile activity in Europe, re:usuring itself
that the headquarters of nont of the exile National Councils were
in the U.S. under nominal C.B. control. Bormally, of course,
each of these countries he epecific interests in Eastern Europe,
As
which do not necessarily coincide with those of the U.3.
conditions approach the normal inch of these countries, NCFE's
grounds for self re-assurance become less solid. Until its May 1,
1951 initiation of eaturation broadcasting to Czechoslovakia,
which marked its appearance as an instrument actively affecting

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
www.
all
:
MEMORANDUM
3.
Way be summarized in
The National Committee for Pros Europe's policy in respect
to Yugoslaan Yuroslav cxile activities may be
the following tatements.
į
with the tomcole
16 plan to interfere,
affairs of the Yugoslav
1. The Committee pres not now,
by radio orri,
people or of the Titoist regime.
2.
71
11
-
Specifi-
In cd far 15 our anti-Stalinista and activitios coincide,
WO sec no reason to shetrect such functional and mutually beneficial
arrangement au may from time to time present themselves.
So with -
cally, we have no objection exchen Radio Felgrade
certain types of radio material in rus
20
to the bountries under
Soviet domination which might enhance the effectiveness of our
the National Committes
radio procram or otherwice aid the work or
for a Free
Free Europe.
»
3. As an anti-Communist organization dedicated to the concepts
of democracy and of individual freedom re feel it is entirely
consistent and proper to extend aid to cratic Yugoslava exiled
from their homelanda, within the budgetary and other limitations
under which we operate. To this end a total of some 6? Yugoslave
are retained by the Committed and engaged in five types of work.
a) In Radio Free Europe, which has no Yugoslav desk,
13 vs have been engaged as information analysts,
program advisors and translators because of their
technical
abilities.
b) In the Mid-European Studies Center 31 Yugoslavs are
engaged in research projecta can with the East,
Eurougen Inquiry, the Law Project and the East European
Accession's List, and include 7 Scholarship students.
---
c) In the Research & Publications Service 9 Yugoslava
are on
In analysis of the Yeesley press and other
sources of information and in the publication of factual,
non-propagandistic studies and batins designed to keep
the emigration and interested Americans informed on
doncatic events.
!
1) The Free Europe University in Exile has selected 13
Yugosl47 students on the same tests of individual merit
as students from the other European Communist nations
have been granted scholarships to study at Strasbourg.
e) Finally, the National Councils Division gives financial
aid to three formerly prominent moslays in recognition
of their past services
services to the
to the cause of democracy.
In conclusion, the number of vulcalays thus supported by the
Committee's various divisions represents .6% of the total exile
staff.
SSW/bvb
Sent to State Dept. 28,
28 July 1952
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_108.jpeg ---
14-00000
--4-
In the cash of the Poles, because of the filure of the
Bolish emigration to produce a united national council which
could be recognized by NOPE, no financial support whatecever
has been given by NCFE to Polia refugee activities, although
the roles have one of the most sizable onigations of all the
nationality groups with which NCFE cooperates, and although
the Poles have an organimation, merican Polink her Hellof, a
voluntary agency, which seems to be at least as effective, if
not more so than the American Fund for Czochoslovak Refugees
or Kumanian Welfare, Inc., organizations with which it is
roughly comparable.
In the case of the Yugoslavs, which is probably the most
dificult case of all, from the 3.8. and the NCFE point of view
as well as from the viewpoint of the individual refuges, NCPE
has confined itself to contributing small amounts to the Benevo-
lont ssociation of Free Citizens of Yugoslavia in London, in
order that cottuin exiled leaders who rendered signal services
to the Allied cause during World sur II, through their partici-
pation in the revolt of March, 1941, which led Yugoslavia to
resist the Nazi Invasion might receive small stipendÐ Although
this aid le rendered through an organization abroad, to exiles
residing abroad, it is in line rather with NCFN's policy of pro-
viding assistance to a political and intellectual olite than with
the policy of indirect support through National Councils or other
organisations of refugee activity. No Yugoslav National Council,
enjoying NCFE recognition, has ever emerged due to the delicate
situation of Western policy vis-à-vis Tito's government,
:
-
.
In the case of the three Baltic States, although NCFE has
been provided, both in the U.B. and abroad, with the instrumenta
which have most nearly proved themselves capable of efficient,
just and honest use of funds for refugee activities; no such
funds have been placed at the disposal of the three Baltic
Consultative Panels or their counterpart committees in Germany
and elsewhere abroad.
Originally, also, although the principle was never clearly
defined or figidly adhered to, and, at present, in as much departed
from as observed, it was felt that E-supported refugee activi-
ties should be restricted, as much as possible, to the type of
assistanco which a consulate would render to its citizens who
found themselves in difficultion in a foreign country. Such ansio-
tance would according to this line of thinking only occasionally
and in cases of extreme and immediate need, be material; essentially
it would consist of Advice, translation and verification of
documents and direction of the refugee to the appropriate agency
capable of furnishing him with the type of further assistance,
material or otherwise, which might be required.
It has always
been recognized, however, that the various National Councils
acting as consulates for their anti-Communist compatriots, who
could not turn to the legally-recognized Communist embassies,
legations or consulates of their countries for help, would have
to provide some material assistance for those who turned to them
for help, if only a tram ticket, to allow them to visit the various
international and local social agencies who could help them, or
"

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_109.jpeg ---
14-00000
-5-
•
1
the price of a meal or a night's lodging which would carry them
over the necessary period of time which it always tires until
the machinery of other gencies can be persuaded to start grinding
for the unsintance of these people. However, as time went on,
NCPE ssistance was also being given, directly or indirectly, to
Agencies which gave particular attention to material aid, as for
instance the APCR and Rumunian Welfare, neither of which has
any clear and responsible relation with a National Council, yet
each of which has been the victim, to some extent, of the vagaries
of exile politics.
Some of the elements which seem, either consciously or
unconsciously to have been operative in the development of this
NONE policy of only limited and indirect concern with the over-all
problem of refugees from Eastern Europe wore the following i
1. Refugeen in the muss were already the direct concern of
a large, well-staffed and well-financed international organization,
the IRO, which mount that the problems confronting the National
Councils and other organisations of the exile olite were limited
in scope.
2. Until the initiation of saturation broadcasting to
Czechoslovakia on May 1, 1951, NCFE (through RPE or any other
instrument) was not itself an active factor in the refuge problem.
It was not directly associated with the refugee himself, either
through indirectly stimulating him to flee or through his increased
value for information poses.
3. The National Councils and Committees were considered to
be a suitable instrument qualified to do with the refugee pro-
blem in the limited manner in which it confronted them during
the existence of IRO. It was felt that any credit for assistance
to refegees could appropriately be given to the national councils,
which would in turn reflect to the credit of NCFE, the U.S. and
the Free est in general.
-III
-
THE CHANGED SITUATION
U.S. AND SUNOPE
While IRO operated NCFE was in a position to sake a distin-
ction between the exile elite and the mass of refugees who were
under the protection of the IRC in Europe. IRC, however, ceased
to exist at the beginning of 1952. Even before 10 disappeared,
care and maintenance of refugees in and out of camps had passed
to the various local national authorities. IRO's functions of
protection and care for the refugee in both legal and sterial
aspects respectively from arrival to emigration have been divided

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_110.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
06-
1
Among these governments and two international agoncion, the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees and PICMN, none of which has
been provided with the means adequate to the performance of
their tasks assigned it, and the latter of which are only just
becoming fully operational. In consequence of IRO's closure
the various voluntary sgencies, such as HCWC, LWF and WCC, etc.,
have been deprived of facilities which wore provided by IRO in
the pest, with the result that they have been compelled to
curtail their activities. Neither of IRQ's successors has
esumed the vest and vital coordinating function porformed by
IRO, with the result that the present confusion is discouraging.
It may devolop that the New State Department MSA program for
neo-refugees will clarify this confused situation, but a proment
it, itself, is yet in unknown factor and naturally rumors
regarding it at the field Lovel have thus fare only served to
na
confound the confusion.
-
.
The period of IRC's existance coincided with the period
of mass emigration, wherous at present emigration ponsibilities
aro small und uncertin, with the result that to the hard core
remnant, which cannot be moved, la boing added to th shall but
steady flow of new arrivals, most of whom are unable to emigrate
and who sust also face the appalling employment conditions in
the frontier countries of Goranny, Austria, Italy and Trioute
(in the oth r fronti r countries of Greace and Turkey the situ-
ation is probably simil.r) and the intermediary receiving countries
buch as France and Britain. Out of the more slowly moving
regnants, particularly in the frontier countries, the possibility
exists for the formation of more stable national committeoB,
which would nence be more susceptible of control.
-
During the early years of NOPE's existence the frontier
and intermediary receiving countries were either absorbed in
post-war reconstruction or were subject to militery occupation
and honce were not in a position to take on netive interest in
the refugees as an instrument of their foreign policice.
NCFE,
in the U.S., therefore, d'afford to ignore mont developments
i ld
of exile activity in Europe, reassuring itself that the head-
quarters of the exile national councils were in the U.2. under
nominal MCFN control. Normally, of course, each of these countries
has specific interests in Eastern Europe. which do not nece@ua-
rily coincide with thee of the 1.5. There are now strong indi-
cations that the situation is more rapidly approaching its more
normal spoct and that it is still in the process of change in
this direction.
In January the British-backed Central and Mistern European
Commission of the suropean Movement held its first ma meeting
in London; in April French Comité Nationale pour l'Europe
Liure emerged; and in June the Germans attempted to bring about
the emergence of a central organization of refugees, which, in
its composition reflected traditional German sympathies with the
Separatist movements of Sustern Europe, a policy which is in
direct conflict with that of NC and RPE.. Although the autho-
ritics, particularly in the irontier countries, probably lack
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_111.jpeg ---
S
14-00000
-7-
-
special financial means to engage in .ctivity on an NCPE-scale,
they do ponnens, by virtue of their control of the legal and
welfare framework within which the refugee must exist the meana:
to extend or withhold benefits so as to influence the refugee.
political situation to their advantage. It seems ressonable to
suppose that as these nationa gain in strength and independance.
this process will continue at an increasing rate.
As a result of the factors described above, the refugee
finds himself in an increasingly hostile environment, noprived
of an offective international protector and incapable, alone,
unsided and unzulded cloraly to as his interests and defend
them from exploitation. The Czechoslovaks and Poles in Germany
provide striking examples of shortsighted, aimless exils
pre-occupation with sterile political manouvering to the advan-
tugo of their German houts. At the same time, the voluntary
agencies in dormany, which, after Iho's domine, were gunted
certain facilities by HICOC must, after the ratification of the
contractual agreements, look to the German Government for
whatever facilities it may choose to grant them.
"
Until its May 1951 initiation of aturation broadcasting
to Czechoslovakia, which marked its appearance as an .nstrument
actively affecting the countries whence the refugees flee, RFE
could also ignore the presence of the refugees in the seat.
Since that time, however, the steady expansion of RFE's activity
and its increasing need of refugeon an informational sources have
led to stron, accusation that RFE 10 evading its responsibi-
lities and failing to accept the consequences of its own effec-
tiveness. Although RFE expressly refrains from specifically
inciting itu audiences to flee, its comparisons of life in the
west with life in the Eusty inevitably constitute an indirect
encouragement to escape. Those accusatione and resentment are
111-concealed among the representatives of the various interna-
tional and voluntary agencies.
RFE's information service men, who, of RFE's personnel, ure
in closest contact with the refugees, sympathize with this
criticism and wish that they could do more for the refugees than
they are prosontly able to do on their own. These RFE information
gatherers are in competition with an endless series of rivals
Beeking this valuable commoulty. They usually present the refugees
who have been helpful in providing them with information with
presents of food, cigurettes or money. Although they would like
to be in a position to no more than this for their info.mants,
they cannot, for, as they explain, they are not in the welfare
business. One of their special difficulties is to persuade the
refugees to come to them in the first place. Almost universally
they have reported that if the refugees were mide to r alize that
Free Europe was doing something or them, they
or them, they would be more willing
and even eager, to come to the RFS information offices in the camps
Rrs
to give freely of their information. Furthermore, RFN's propa-
ganda can be dangerously wenkoned by the boomerang effect of the
few disillusioned refugees who return to their homelands.
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_116.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
-12-
do much to dispel this negative attitude and would pave the way
for a more positive and productive cooperation between the natio-
nel refugee groups and the agencies tctive in their behalf.
The control would also it is reble to suppose, help to
1111 vacuums in exile representation of
of the kind described above.
5. Another weakness of the organizations surveyed in the
frontier countries is their almost universal tendency in greater
or leaser degrees to discriminate politically or personally in
the distribution of assistance. There is no comparison between
the extent of this weatness in the tease and unsettled atmosphere
of She frontier countries and the more normal environment of
BA intermediary receiving countries, France and Britain:
In
addition to the injustice of such discrimination, definito oppor-
tunities are loat through failure seriously to attempt to win
over, through less narrow assistance, elements (such as the Czech
ch
and Slovak Separatisto, Hungari extremists and the Seawabs)
*ion now oppose or inthe future might oppose the political and
national structures which NCF recognizes and supports..
Conclusion:
Again, close RCFE guidance and control are indicated so
that injustices may be reduced and moder NCFE aims implemented,
rather than thwarted by narrower interests of short-sighted and
unenlightened refuges representatives.
- V -
HOW ACE'S WEERAST
Br.
PUGET PROBLER
1.7 143 PRE
-
THE
A. SC's approach
:
If NCHA is to modify its present instruments and create new
ones to nifes its interest in the prob. m of refugees in
Europe, it should first formulate a broad and comprehensive
approach to the refugee as type of person in whom and in whose
problems this interest is to be show.
This approach will, by the nature of NC's interest in the
refugee, uiffer markedly from those of other organisations active
in the field.
All these organizations, the intelligence agencies, the
local national governments, the High Commissioner and the
UN
voluntary agencies, are interested in the Czechoslovak or
Rumanian or Pole who crosses the border because, respectively,
he right be a Communist agent or have information, he is or might
be a political refugee or because he a human being in need.
NCFE is interested in him because he is Czechoslovak or Rumanian

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_115.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
N
Conclusions:
-11-
NOF 's approach to the refugee and his problems must be
broad in order that it may impart a feeling of purpose, direc-
tion, continuity and security.
attractive national flavor which will appeal to the refugee's
This appro ich must have an
desire to belong, without encouraging his chauvinistic tendencies,
and, indeed, should provide a positive substitute for them.
To implement this approach NCF's instrument in the field must
again be supremely flexible but susceptible of close and rigid
control. This instrument must be capable of conveyin;; an
impression of seriousness, responsibility and constructive
interest, thus inspiring feeling of confidence on the purt
of the authorities and agencies as well as the refugees.
1 =
3. In general it may be observed that in the frontiers
countries there is a notable lack of knowledge of NCFE's role
in support of the admittedly limited and relatively negligible
refugee activities in which it is thus far indirectly engaged.
RFE is, of course, widely known und inest as widely criticized
for its failure to accept responsibility for its part in the
refugee problem. NEUE is usually known, but only vaguely und
secondarily, and in many cases the picture of its scope, acti-
vities and gouls is distorted. There is a din awareness of
PEUE's connection with RFE, but a general Lilure to draw any
conclusions therefrom.
Conclusion :
To engage in refugee activities of any nature or extent
without clearly identifying and labelling as the organiza-
tion ultimately responsible for these setivities is a needless
and senseless failure to exploit a possibility in the form of
enhanced NO prestige and greater sympathy and cooperation.
with the work of RFE and FEUN on the part of both refugees and
other active agencies. Particularly from the point of view of
RFE's essential relationship to the refugees it in a serious
mistake not to do so. Thorolore the instrument which NCPS
adpps for its work in this field must be identifiable only as
an SOFE operation, clearly related to RFE and PEUE.
4. It has been mentioned previously that the international
anu voluntary agencies tend to regard the exile representatives
with skepticism and tend to hold them at arm's length.
attitude seems partially to result from their ignorance of exile
This
politics and their understandable reluctance to become involved
therein. Their ignorance and disinterests in several casos
led them to choose refugee assistants and advisors of unfortunate
political background and tendencies from the CFE point of view.
Again, however, as mentioned above, the representatives of
several of these agencies have expressed definite interest in
having these insuppressible refugee groups somehow organized and
controlled.
Conclusion :
:
Responsible and direct American control would therefore

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_112.jpeg ---
14-00000
-80
In consequence of the closure of IHO and the absence of
any authority capable of organining and controlling the refugee
national committoes a double vacuum oxists. In respect to the
Tirst vacuum, the UN High Commission, PICKE, the voluntary
agencies and the State Department program have yet to prove their
ability to fill it. In respect to the second vacuum, the Bribish,
the French, the Italians, the Austrians and
tie possibilition of filling this vacuum.
the Gormans have
interest is most likely to provide the most direct and immediate
Of these, the Ver on
conflict with MCFE-RPE interests.
have demonstrated an interest in these committeon and particularly
The fact at the Ger. ano
in support of the Boparatist elements indicates that those commi-
ttees are not without political importance;
Because of the
political ambitions or honest desire to serve of their leaders
and of the end of the refugee for spokesmen and representatives
in their doulinge with local authorities, such commistion will
always exist, whether or not they are controlled or supported.
If these committoos .re to be controlled at all, it is obviously
to NCFR's advantage that they be controlled by NOPE.
dùngorous to Bouai o
It would bo
that this control, could be exercised Bolely
through the "loudera" residing in the U.3. an the opportunity.
exists for theun loadera and for those in Europe to play off
one Western Power against another.
trated in ono caso that the branch of a national council, with
It has already been demons-
headquarters in the U.S., que to the exigencies of the local
situation may be obliged to follow a policy which is quite contrary
to the interests of NCPE.
In addition to the major double vacuum described above, our
survey has disclosed the existence of a number of minor vicaums
in exile representation which have been filled by unscrupulous
self-appointed national representatives whose presunce has been
largely responsible for the skepticism and distrust with which
exile representatives are frequently regarded by the international
and voluntary agencios. This unfortunate factor may be traced to
the lack of recognized accreditation for such representatives, to
the absence of any responsible and consistent field supervision,
control and backing of worthy and qualified representatives.
this regard, representatives of the UN High Commission and the
In
voluntary agencies have expressed a definite interest in efforts
to order the chaotic situation of the national representatives,
-
IV
RECONSIDERATION OF NOPE'S BASIC
IN VERU.. ENT IN ITS RELATIONSHIP
WITH
L REFUGREST THE
NATIONAL UCD CLIM
As we have shown above, it is to NOFE's interest to attempt
to order this confused situation, and if the attempt is to be made;
careful consideration must be given to the selection of the tools
which are to be used. The Division of NUFE which has hitherto
dealt with NCFE's relations with the exiles, and indirectly with
the refugees, has been the National Councils Divisions. This Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_113.jpeg ---
14-00000
N
-9-
hus used as its basic instrument the National Councils and
Committees which have their hondquarters in the 1.3.
experience over the past three yours has served conclusively
NOFB's
to modify the initial view of the National Councils as suitable
instruments for the creation not only of on twouphere of posi-.
tive and constructive cooperation, but even for the effective
Implementation of NCFS policy and purpose.
·
The divisive factors of exile have resulted in 1
1. The absence of any Polish National Council which can
qualify for NCFE recognition;
2. The absence of any Rumanian National Council, which can
qualify for NCFE recognition;
3. A prolonged split ( a year and a half) in the Council
of Free Chochoslovakia;
4. A precariously balanced Hungarian National Council.
w
Other factors hive produced n Bulgarian National Committee which
is uns tisfactory from almost every point of view.
productive reform of the BNU will doubtless prove a prolonged
Conuine and
and difficult process. This leaven the NCP with a National
Committee for a Free Albania, which could stand reform und
which, nevertheless, is always been chosely supervised by
Americane and with the three Baltic Consultative Panels which
were established entirely by NCFE in the first instance.
No single national council during its existence, with the
possible exception of the three Baltic Consultative Panels, has
demonstrated itself us being capable of oven reasonably officient
and just administration of its own alfairs. In each case
NCFE has been obliged to stop in, at first exercising only
cursory supervision, but at present ttempting to introduce
systems of closer administrative and financial control and
supervision, which, unless unde sufficiently rigid, will doubt-
less prove as unsatisfactory as they have been in the pust.
Where national councilo do exist branches or sections of
these councils which have demonstrated their effectiveness can
and should be used where practical to implement on secondary
level NCFE projects and policies. For the primary implementa-
tion of these projects and policies, however, & more permanent
ordered and controllablo apparatus must be found, one not liable
to the naturally disruptive tensions of exile life. Even whero
unity in a national council can be produced, experience has
proved that its continuity is at best tenuous and unreliable,
with the result that the council becomes delicate and cumbrous
apparatus which must subordinate the achievement of practical
goals to the maintenance of this temporary and elusive unity.
-
Further factors discolsed by our survey reinforce the
00
conclusion that if NCPC 18, as we believe it must, effective (60

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_114.jpeg ---
14-00000
-10-
develop its interest in the European refuge field, a new instru-
ment must be found. These factors also tend to indicate roughly
some of the qualities which this instrument sust po93088.
1. No single exile organlantion engaged in refugee acti-
vity, including those receiving NCTS support, is consistently
good in all of its local branches. This observation applies
also to those organimations receiving NOP supports which do
not fall into the national council entegory (the BPGR and
Rumanian elfaro).
Conclusions :
In its activity in the European refurres fild, JOFE
munt bo completely free to welect the organizations and indi-
viduals with which it may consider it practical to cooperate
on any level. NCP must therefore not be committed to support
or to cooperate with any organization in all parts and
must be free to ever connections t any time with any organi-
zation or its parts (individuals or sections) with which it
finds it no longer practical to cooperate. NCPE must be comple-
tely flexible in this operation.
2. The refugee in Europe is confronted with a situation
which is fluid in all its apects. Ho faces eines the closure
of IRC, a multitude of uncoordinated agencion, the continued
existence of some (the voluntury agencies) is uncertain; the
operations of others (the und PICME) remain be developed
l
✓
fully; the scope and activity of another (the State Department
Program) is in the rumor stage. He is uncertain, suspicious
and retuful of the now status and intentions of the loc 1 natio-
nal authorities under whose immediate jurisdiction he must live.
ie faces the after-offects of mass omigration, ich, although
it coused some time ago, a deprived him of the most qualified
of his compatriots and honce of stable national leadership.
For himself, the limited, uncertain and uncocrainated emigration
on an individual basis which still exists offera but faint hope
for departure from the frontier countries. He faces almost
impossible employment conditions, depending upon local situa-
tions and seasonal work which often requires his being shifted
from place to place is the employment situation dictates. The
majority, however, must stay in the camps or on the cole. He
faces shifting camps which are often moved or dissolved by the
loc.1 authorities. These actors combin to procuce a demora-
lizing feeling of impermanence and insecurity. They aro, in
turn, aggravated by the unsympathetic attitude of the countries
in which the refugee finds himself, an attitude which frequently
approaches hostility and which is not improved by the presence
in these countries of embtered expelled ethnic minorities who
were nce the citizens of the refugee's homeland. The homeland an
is a deplorable feeling of apathy, hopelessness, isolation and
abandonment and a total lack of any sense of direction or purpose.
:
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_117.jpeg ---
14-00000
?
-
6
-13-
or Pole -- a citizen of country whose people were promised
at Yalts certain rights and privileges which they have not
received because of the violent interference of a Communist
Russia. This is also the fundamental theoretical reason for
RPE broadcasts to the Czechoslovaks in Czechoslovakia, the
Foles in Foland, tc. The fundamental practical reuson in of
course the interest of the United States in these nations and
peoples us Europe in political fuctors.
.
'
'
RFB obviously cannot create a military machine capable of
liberating the nations of Elstern Europe. It is interested ghite
siply in promoting the existence of certain attitudes, interesta
und activities which will ono day contribute to the successful
fulfillment of the promises unde at Yaltu. RNB is interested
that mothers should te ich their children certain truths to
counter Communist lies; that workers should react in certain
Ways to Communist pressurea; that students should understand
the fallacies of the system which they are being seduces or
forced to serve. In short, RFE wishes to direct Czechoslovaks
in Czechoslovakia, Poles in Poland and Hungarins in Hungary
to act in the enlightened self-interest of their respective
nations. The fact that this enlightened self-intereat,
supported by RPE, coincides with our own und other broader
interests serves only to underline its importance.
se
we have tried to point out in this report the extent to
which the presence and netivities and problems of the refugeeB
from NCFA countries in ostern Eurape cannot but be of interest
to NCFE. Again, NCFE need not concern itnolf directly with the
feeding, housing, employment and emigration of these people,
any more than RFE should itself undertake to raise an imy.
ato
This is not to say there may not in it advisable to
continue to use limited welfare funds in its work with refugees.
But its principal tasks will be to protect its interests by
attempting to produce some order out of th chos of refugees
activities by giving to the refugee and his representatives a
sense of direction and belonging which the other agencies active
in the field are admittedly unable adequately to provide. Without
it, the refugee in Europe lmost inevitably sinks into state
of hopeless and isolated apathy. He belongs to nothin but the
tense and quarrelsome fritority of his fellow abandoned. Sitting
unoccupied all day, his only "ctivity soon becomes the endless
intrigue of the political parties. with few books and less commu-
nication with the outside world, in particularly, without
constructive leadership and guidance, the parties become almost
the only organizations with national flavor open to the refugee.
In this atmosphere it is not surprising that refugee nationalisms
become chauvinistic and idens, of national interest, subordinated
to the narrow and petty goals of the political parties.
The voluntary and other agencies and the loc 1 national
authorities can hardly provide a constructive substitute since
they only approach the refugee as such, reenforcing his apathy
by their Euch needed gifts, unable to offer allegiance to anything
other than the Churches, opposed or reluctant to undertake any
,'
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_12.jpeg ---
E.
T
Security Information
Didot 1671
11 December 1952
CHIEF, POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF,
SUBJECT:
National Committee for a Free Europe
1. I would like to call DD/P's attention to this unsolicited
memorandum. It is additional evidence for my own observation made
to him orally that the work of backstopping NCFE is being carried
forward in a manner which at least attempts to meet the challenge
of servicing the entire Agency in those aspects of NCFE work which
can be useful to the various Divisions of the Agency.
2. As he is aware, NCFE conducts an enormous amount of
research and other activity. I believe we can now say with some
certainty that this record is being put to use by Washington.
Attachment
T B
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Memo from DC/O,SI dtd 26 Nov. 52
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_118.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
I
!
t
.
I
-14-
attempt at support or guidance of his national tendencies.
#ll fairness, it should be noted, however, that the current
In
approach to the refugee on the part of all these Agencies is a
coracious and considerable improvement on the exaggerated and
Incentive-killing IRO dole system.
auc
But if NCFE approaches the new enc pee, as well as the
older Dr, not no a moody "refugee" but as a citizen of his
country who simply finds himself in a difficult position on
this side of the Iron Curtain rth r than on the other sis
it should be possible to appeal to his desire for national
continuity and then to some oxtont appod to his ideas of his
own enlightened self-interest in much the same why that such
appeals are provided for the escapee's compatriots at home
by 7.
h
This approach would also take into account the significant
fact that many of the new arrivals, (estimates run as high as
20% are not real "political refugees". They leave their
countries for economic reason or because they are fed up or
simply want to try out the conditions in the west which are
described to them as no much superior to those in their hose-
lande. Among these people there are of course many misfits,
incompetent a and undesir bles. No one whould delude himasif
with a picture of all refugees worthy, deserving, honest
people persecuted by a Communist regime and fleeing for their
Very lives,
"
SCFE interests, however, override this unfortunate reality:
no individual who leaves in satellite country for any resson
whatever should be allowed to fall into such a condition of
disillusionment that he should consider returning or even consider
sending work of him discouragement home. One such return or
report of personal disillusionment can produce a most unfortunate
countereffect to RYE and other Heatern propaganda. It is an
accepted fact that there have been such cases nd they are in
fact regarded as one of the factors contributing to the present
lower arrival rate of now oscapeco.
Granted thi approach to the escapes and the old refugee
and DP ae a citizen, and the desire to promote among these people
the lie of concern for their real self-interests, the id which
most adequately describes this approach is that of the "consulate".
--
The functions of a consulate ro to protect the interests
of the citizen abroad. Kutorial assistance is provided only in
cases 21 emergency the consulates principal task is to take
an active interest in guiding the citizen to those local agencies
best able to satisfy his wants and to suggest approaches and
attitudes most likely to benefit him during his stay abroad.
The most glaring and urgent example of the need for such consular
guidance may be found in the necessity for protecting the Czecho-
slovaka in Germany not only from the political opposion of the
Germans, but from their own senseless, destructive and short-
sighted political maneuverings.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_120.jpeg ---
14-00000
-16-
...
refugees and other agencies nctive in the field regarding all
phases of HCFE work, and particularly that of FLUN and RFE.
NOVE
P) The uttempt to keep the NCPE European Representative
and the RPE Political Advisor informed of exile political deve-
lopment: 1: Europe which might affect their operations and to
control n guide thene divelop nis wherever possible to the
udvantage of NCFE and RFE. For example, NCPE, designed to
wage political warfire on a broad front, was recently, almost
outflanked in Germany. Some organized means of preventing
such occurences, or at lount of reporting their development,
Phould be provided.
1. The primary function of PECS is to approach the refugee
De a citizen and by so doing to try and set up conditions and
introduce a spirit which will make it possible for the refugee
to encape from the pathy which is his traditional lot and
become a positive factor in the struggle of the hest. FRCS
will attempt to perform this function in several ways:
a. Normal consular activity. FECS will engage in the
normal concular activities of interventions on behalf of refu-
gees with the local authorition, voluntary agencies, interna-
tional agencies such as the UN High Commission, or wherever el80
it might offectively and usefully do so. It will provide trans-
lations, verify documents, advise refuzoes on 11 relevant matters
in conjunction with these other agencies and generally interest
itself inf all aspects of the refugee's life ana problaze.
b. Material nonintance. White material assistance should
be kept to a minimum, it must be recognized that Plus will be
required to provide more help of this kind than the normal consu-
liten, since the physical condition of the person appealing for
assistance will almost invariably be poor. Other org nications
are botter not up to provide such material needs, and FLCS should
of course attempt to cooperate with their already extensive
efforts to prevent duplication. But FRCS muny have available
emergency welfare funds in order to escape the accusation that
it is a feath rbed or another operation to "use" the refugee.
c. Refures morale. The fundamental practical target of
all PECS operations should be the improvement of refuges morale.
This more depends on two fictors: the refugee's frase of mind
and the atmosphere in which he lives.
The refugee's frame of mind should be improved in several
ways. The first of these is the citizenship approach which is
to govern all FEC3 operations. It should be manifested as soon
as possible after the refugee's arrival and clearance, if only
in the form of a greeting and briefing from someone not interested
in milking the relugee of information and an ing his questions.
This briefing might include a description of the voluntary agencies
which might assist the refugee, a description in simple terms
of his logul status and, of course, of the FECS program, including
the names and addresses of its representatives in the exmps or

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_119.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
-15-
B. Bodifications of Nd's present instrument.
As indicated above, it will of coursh be useful and desi-
rable to incorporate in this approuch and in the new instrument,
(FHCB), designed to implement it, features, (individuals and
organisations) of the present instrument which hav demonstrated
their effectiveness. However, also an mentioned earlier, in
order to asure the freedom of action and freedom of choice of
the new instrument, certain modifications of those, features of
the present instrument will be required.
It will first of all be necessary that those features
(individuals and organizations) of the prosent instrument consi-
dered suitable for incorporation in PEC3 be separated adminio-
tratively and financially from their headquarters, since PECS
will operate on the basis of the following prodedural approachi
Such individuals or organizations will be incorporated in
PECS on one primary basis their proved effectiveness in the
pust and/or their promise of offectiveness under NCFE guidance;
their retention will be dependent upon their ability auccessfully
to continue this performance. This is of course basically an
adaptation of part of the approach which has enabled RFE and HPS
to make effective use. of qualified exile personnel for the attain-
ment of their own goals
2.
-
For the undirected and uncoordinated system of almost
complete lack of control which has hitherto generally prevailed
in NCFE's relationship to refuged activities and exile organi-
sations, will be substituted a system of control which will
preserve at lost the illusion of freedom through the incorpo-
ration of qualified exile org lantions and individuals and
the selection of others to fill gaps which such organisationa
The fact of their
and individuals lave proved unable to fill.
ultimate responsibility to NCFE should be made .bundantly clear.
That this is in no way incompatible with the atmosphere of an
illusion of freedom in which PECS's exile employees will be
working is amply proves by the success of RFS national desko.
It will be made clear to these employees that they should
consider themselves to be working an consuls and consulur
assistants under a civil sorvice program. They should be given
the impression that the responsibility for the success of FECS
in its attempts to assist the refugeen lies in their hands,
and that its failure for reasons of favorition or dishonesty
would constitute un evasion of their patriotic responsibility.
C. Functions and potentialities of PECS.
The underlying purpose of FRCS is of course to serve the
policies and basic interests of NCFE.. we have tried to indicato
the extent to which its work with the refugees would be directly
to these interests. Other interests which PECS would have the
purpose of serving might be :
1) The prevention of aleunderstandings on the part of the

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_121.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
-17-
arous to which the refugen might be sont. The refuzon might
aloc be saved considerable disillusionment if at this time ho
were given a carefully worded description of the difficult
econemle situation in which he will be obliged for some time
to remin. Por example in Germany, the rolugee should be told
of the presence of large number of refugeon from the East Zone
and of the German government's natural desire to waist them.
A representative of one of the voluntary agencios suggested
to us it the refugees are rarely made to understand that they
are initially accepted into countries fuced with unusually severe
economic problems.
.
:
Secondly, the refugee's frame of aina might be improved
by the installation of reading rooms containing publications
in the national languages, some of them geured especially to
the refuges and his problems. For example
For example, some of the waoful
exile-organ led refugee aid Committees such as the Anglo-Rumanian
in London and the Hungrian Office in hunich produce regal.r
bulloting containing local logul und employment news of interest
to the refugee. Buch bulletins should receive a wider distri-
bution und others like them nhould be crouted. In this connection,
it should be noted that BP3. publications are not reaching the
refugeen, among whom our survey has indicated they would be
most welcome and are much nocsed. Also in the roading roomu,
radios should be provided in response to the donire, frequently
expressed to un, of hearing HPE and other broadenota in the
nation 1 1nguages.
The organization of constructive meetings, discusalong and
national celebrations would provido un outlet for refugee enthu-
Slaums if they were supervised by competent lendorchi Simi-
larly, PECD should stimulate and possibly provide the means
for slf-help work projects, such as the paintings of barracks,
the planting of gardene in the organization of sowing cireloa,
lunguage courses or discussion groups, ota....
•
'
The second factor involved in the question of refugon
morle is that of his environment, the atmosphere in which ho
lives To a large extent this atmosphere would-be improved-in
which lives. To a large extent this atmosphere would be
improved by the organization, noted above, of constructive
Cutlets for the energies now dissipated in chauvinistic and petty
politic 1 internal and international strife, both of which have
at times led to murder in the camps.
ab
FHC3 major effert in this direction, however, should be
directed toward bridging the gap in constructive manner botween,
a
on the one hand, the voluntary and international agencies and
the local authorities; and, on the other, the essential national
interests of the refugee. Occasionally representatives of the
voluntary agencies have mentioned the fact that refugees sometimes
cooperate with them best when the situation has been explained
by one of their national representatives. For the reasons of
[ suspicion on the part of these agencies cited earlier, this is
not always done. FRCS could provide a responsible instrument for
so doing.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_123.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
-19-
have additional authority for such arguments by virtue of their
membership in one division of an organization actively working
in many ways for the liberation of the refugees' homelands.
Also, just so the presence of extracu ricular schools,
by their geruntee of the preservation of the essentials of
national culture, encourage attendance at German schools, 80
the manifestations of NCFE's similar interest on the local
level through FECS might liberate the refugee from the anxiety
for maintaining his traditions within his smaller group and so
diminish his reluctance to attempt some measure of adaptation.
In this connection the citizenship approach applies particularly,
oince FECS must demonstrate that NCFE is not only generally and
broadly interested in keeping satellite culture alive (th the
DIO and tas at FEUE), but also in keeping the individual refugee
living outside a camp, in touch with his compatriots and trudi-
tions not only through personal contact but by making available
to him publications in his language, etc; In tin way the
refugee mig t be encouraged in his slow process of adaptation
to strange and in many cases moale environment.
Laa
This is again a vast problem affected by many factors
far beyond the scope of FECH or NCFE. It is almost certainly
true that if more respectable and worthwhilė jobs were availa-
ble to refugees, much of their apparently nationally based
aversion to adaptation would disappear,
But if FECS makes emphasis on adaptation one of its
major points of policy, and makes this fact clear to the local
national and international authorition, and then actively imple-
mento this policy, he suggested above, it will almost certainly
ne
find itself most sympathetically regarded by these auth ritios.
2.
.
These are but a few of the functions which FECS should
be able to perform; anyone regularly active in the field could
probably чuggest many more. There are, however, certain broader
potentialities for the development of this instrument which
might be briefly suggested more.
In the first place, it should be possible to gain
some advantage, beyond the fact that they come to us, from
the presence of the refugees in the west. PECS might be able
to produce such an advantage.
To brand this approach as hopelessly idealistic is to
ignore the extraordinary practical results accieved at Camp
Valka from July 1951 to January 1952 by the German camp commander
at that time, von Howeyer. When von Homeyer, with no previous
experience of these problems arrived, Valke was in terrible
situation. Enifings and riots were frequent and the Nuremberg
police were not only on constant alert, but a force of 28 men
was maintained at the camp.
Von Homeyer began by calling the national representatives
together, and it took him two weeks to get them into one rooms

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_126.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-22-
3. The Deputy Director will be responsible for the imple-
mentation on the operational level in all res of 11 the
functions of FEC3 in line with policies established by tho
Director. The Deputy Director will be responsible for general
operational policy coordination with the national and interna-
tional authorities and voluntary agencies locally active.
4.
.
a
The Deputy Director ill have six Arm, Bsaistants &
1) North Germany, center Bonn or Hannover.
2) South Germany, center munion and Vilka·
3) US and French ones of Austria, center Salzburg und wels.
4) British Zone Austria and Trieste
5) Italy, center Rome.
-
possibly two assistants
6) Paris, London and Bonolux, center ruris.
7) Greece and Turkey, probably will require one area assis-
tant ouch. However, no field survey of the refugee
situation in these two countries ho as yet been possible.
The duties of these Assistants will be to provide guidance,
inspiration and close administrative and financial supervision
of the various national sections of CS in their respective
area. These Area Assistants must have considerable adminie-
trative and fin neil latitue in order that FUCS may pos0038
the high degree of flexibility essential to its effective ex-
ploitation of the fluid refugee situation. They must be fully
informed of all employment and enigration ponsibilites, projects
of voluntary agencies, etc. Their cooperation und relations with
local authorities and active agencies must be close and their
relations with them always excellent.
:
no
4. PECS will, in each area where it is to operate, form
National Sections. These National Sections will be recruited
and appointed by PECS. They may or may not include individual
representatives of organimations Ire locally active. In
rare cases in the frontier countries, but almost entirely in
England und France, prove: exile-organized refugee aid Committees
will become the local National Sections. In cases where
proven exile-organized refugee aid Committems exist, the FECS
Area Assistant will recruit with the help and approval of the
Deputy Director a National Section Chief, who will in turn,
with the approval of the area Assistant, recruit his own paid
assistant or associate where necessary, un. UB many as local
volunteer section member-representatives us may be required
by the amount of work, geographical distribution of the refugees,
otc.
5.
Fossible organization of FECS national sections:
England
a) Albanians: special case

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_124.jpeg ---
14-00000
-20-
Finally, when they and ssembled, he gave them hell and explained
it would be a waste f time for them to try to alter or influence
the situation in their own countries from Valka. He told them
he believed the cause of many difficulties was the personal
interest of many of the leaders in preparing the way for bis
roles at home after liberation. He then presented his ides
of forming the first European community at Valka. He told the
national representatives he had no support from unich he
was on his own and asked for their help and cooperation. One
by one they came to him and agreed.
-
Von Homeyer's technique of making friends with the people,
with whom he soon acquired an excellent reputation, was on
effective instrument in Swinging their national committees.
to his side, for aware of his popularity, they hesitated not
to show active cooperation. As a moing or delegating; self-
administration of the camp to elected representatives, von
Homeyer was about to establish a small parliment when he was
reculled by reason of German Administrative snafu in which
favoritism playd a part. Just before his departure, the
Nuremberg chief of police appro ched him and asked that he
request the withdrawal of the permanent squad, which the chief
felt was no longer required due to the enormous progress in
camp behaviour.
After von Homeyer's replacement by an unimaginative
bureaucrat, the situation at Valk relapsed into vi lence.
Yet his influence lingered, and delegations from the national
groups visited him. be ging him to return to the cump. Later,
when the situation became aven worse, delegates from the
German administrative personnel at Valka also came to urge
that he return. This was just before our talk with him, and
the employees brought with them tules of the latest knifing.
Obviously von Homeyer's idealistic and far-sighted approach
to the refugee problem hd mude profound impression not only
upon the refuges themselves but on Germans associated with
the problem in practical way.
s
14
Von Home: r's European community approach might be borne
in mind in connection with NCPS's espousal of the policy of
Federalism. Similarly the PRCS citizenship approach sight have
the potentiality of being broadened to provide grass-routs
emphasis on this aspect of NCPE's policy. The idea of European
citizenship for refugees is not original or new, but it might
provide NCFE and RFB with useful propugin weapon.
Von Homeyer's realistic and productive idealism perhaps
also indicates the necessity for at least trying to uncover
and support more positive elements than the usual exile poli-
tical leers, even though it is believed likely that the
latter will be able to regain control of their political
machinery and return to power after libration. For this
r8:80,
not to attempt the production of more constructive
lenders und attitudes more amenable to NCFEnd US interests
is an example of infatuation with "hard-boilea "realism for its
own sake.
-1-1-1-1-1-1-

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_127.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
France
Germany
b) Bulgarianse Karnatoyanova as Section Chief
c) Czechoslovako: Anglo-Czechoslov Kollef Committ:o
d) Estonians t _ssociation of Estonians in Great Britain
9) Hungarians: Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
Possibly Father Horkey-i{"nig
f) Latvians: Latvian welfare Association
g) Lithuanians: Lithuanian Association in Great Britain
h) Polos & Polish Ex-Combatants Association
1) Rumanian anglo-kumanian Refugee Committee
1) Yugoslavs : Bugoslav Welfare Committee (special case)
a) Albanians: special case
b) Association des Réfugiés Bulgares en france
c) Comité d'Aide Zociale nux Réfuglóo Tohécoslovaques
d) Comité d'Entr'Aide Estonien
ien
e) Comité des Refugiés Hongrois
f) Association d'Entr'Aide Letton en France
g) Association Lithuanienne de Bienfaisance
h) Polish Section Chief and probably two paid assistants.
to be recruited and appointed.
1) CAROMAN
1) Yugoslav Section Chief and one paid naistant to be
recruited and appointed (Special case).
1) special case
1
r
b) Bulgarian Section Chief to be recruited and appointed.
•
c) Czechoslovak Section, paid Associate and one paid
assistant to be recruited and appointed.
d) Estonian National Committee
e) Hungarian Office, plus Hungarian Relief Action
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_122.jpeg ---
14-00000
-1}j-
J
1
The principal gip which exists at present between the various.
authorities and the refugees is over the queution of assimilation,
or, as it is usually described, "integrition" and "adu,tition".
There in a nitural feeling on the part of these agenciou and at-
thorition, tant in view of the roat iction of emigration possibi-
lities, the only alternative open to many of the refugees in to
edsot themselves to their environment. The refugee, is, however,
quite understand. bly reluctant to do so: He plans to return
to his country when it is liberated "next your"; he is sure he
'nofsour"; ho
will migrate shortly; particularly in Germany, he may strongly
dial or distrust the local population. Thorn Islso of course
the determining factor of employment possibilities - one of the
aspects of the refugee problem with which cannot and need
FSCH
not directly concern itself.
Indirectly, however, PECS con contribute to ith solution.
For example, in Germany, the problem of national schools, which
how been a core point, surgents a aul table compromise. The
refugees have struggled to maintin full-time national schools
for their chiluren, sometimes succeeding with NFE and other
external support, while the loc 1 and International authorities
have insisted that refugee children attend Gorman schools.
refugee must be made to understand that it in to his children's
interest to allow them to adapt as lon
the oasential elements.
or national culture can be preserved. This requirement could be
una in some instance is already being met by extra-curicular
instruction in the national Language, history and culture.
--
-
ro
--
The
In the Bune way the refugee must also be shown that by
refusing to supt, he may make of his national group an ingrown,
deupised and distrusted minority. If on the other hand, he shows
willingness to adapt to the situation in which he finds himself,
ho is much more likely to obt.in not only physical but psycho-
logic 1 benefits in the form of bronder practical experience,
with the possibility that this experience may ene dy be of use
to him in his own homeland. This is a difficult point which the
mass of refugees will be reluctant to greep. Nome of their more
intelligent leaders, however, the <ind which FECS hopes to
employ might be able to explain its importance. Also, the
experience of one comp director in Trieste ha proved that it is
rot impossible to got results through healthy national competi-
tions; if the Rumanians paint their barracks, the Hungarians feel
more obliged to paint theirs. While probably ineffective among
the hardened older refugees, shame night successfully be usod
among new arrivals, as for example, "If you say you intend to
return after liberation, what will you tell your friends that you
dia for Poland in emigration ? That you helped create friends for
Poland by keeping the neatest barracks in Warminy
or that
you out around a pigsty all ay doing nothing? That you refused
to take a job in construction company because it was beneath
you, or that you helped to build a stronger and more prosperous
zout to hasten the day of liberation ?" Arguments of this kind
were not wholly without effect on strikers, na shirkers, during
the war. Doubtless they have been tried by representatives of
the voluntary agencies, etc., but FTCS representatives should
*
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_128.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
-24-
(f) Latvian National Committee plus Latvian Red Cross
g) Lithuanian National Committee
h) Polish Section Chief and two puld assistants to be
recruited and appointed.
1) Rumanian Section Chief to be recruited and appointed.
Chief
1) Yougoslav Section/and one paid assistunt to be recruited
und appointed (Special case).
Austria
Trieste
u) Special case-Albani
b) Bulgarian Section Uhief to be recruited and appointed.
c) Czechoslovak Section Chief to be recruited and appointed.
d) Estoniano
- none
e) Hungarian Section Chief and two paid assistants to be
recruited and appointed.
1) Latvians - none
g) Lithuaniana - none
h) Polish Section Chief to be appointed. Possible use of
APWR Salzburg representative, ar. Knilski.
1) Rumanian Section Chief to be recruited and appointed.
j) Yugoslav Section Chief to be appointed. Possible uso
of Volonel Bojovic (Special case).
a) special case-Albanians
b) Bulgarian Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
c) Czechoslovaks
-
nono
d) Estonians - none
e) Hungarian Section Chief and one paid assistant to be
appointed. Possible use of Prof. Terny as half-time
Chief with full time assistant.
f) Latvians
->> none
g) Lithuanians
- none
h) Polish Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_125.jpeg ---
i
14-00000
:
-21-
Another potential use of PECS might be in conjunction
with certain proposals advanced by individual RFE staff members.
These call for the use of refugees as eunding bourde for group
reactions to new brondenst themes and as ample groups for
testing basic stuellite country attitudes. Refugees helped by
FECS might be more interested in contributing to such projects;
conversely, FUCS offorts to restore their feeling of belonging
to the struggle for liberation of their countries would be
imme.curable assisted by this opportunity for them to assist in
the sharpening of this potent "sister weapon"..
-1-:-:-:-:-
NCFE and RPE exile employeen who by and large form a
privileged class among the refugees as a result of being rela-
tively well paid, should be encouraged to contributo small but
regular amounts of their salaries on a voluntury deduction basis
to refugee welfare. Some RFE employees have already done this
on an informal basis and have expressed a desire to do so on
a regular deduction basis but have been discouraged by the
information that this would involve violation of RFE regula-
tions. In view of the success of a similar welfare fund insti-
tuted by the rolloh Lubor Service Companion attached to the
U.S. Army in Germany, it is recommended that this possibility be
investigatod. NECS might prove a sure means of channeling such
aid to the refugee.
:
The form for refugees in Turkey established by the Gazi
Khan Bessolt Committee which has an internationaluspect resembling
Von Homover's approach would qualify for inclusion in the FEC3
program, although no specific proposal can
proposal can be made until after
a detailed field survey.
D. Proposed organisations of FECS.
1. PECS will be a service section of NCPS under the direc-
torship of NOME's General European Representative. General
policy headquarters will therefore be in Faris as well as the
operational subsection responsible for the administration of
the PHCS branches in England and Frunce. This will have the
advantages of removing the general policy headquarters from
the immediate tensions and pressures of the frontier countries.
The Director will have the task of general policy coordination
of PECS with other NCPE divisions and of gining on a high
level the cceptance of and cooperation with FECS by the na-
tional und international authorities concerned, perhaps by
emphasis on the contribution whic F CS could make to their
efforts to resolve the refugee problem.
2. Operational houdquarters under the direction of a FECS
Deputy Director will be in Munich, the point closest to the
refugees' geographical center : from unich the German refugee
reception center at Vilka and the Austri in equivalent at Wels
are each within half a day's drive, or less.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_13.jpeg ---
0000
STANDARD FORM NO. 54
SECRET
Security Information
Office Memorandum
TO
:
Chief, PP/IOD
PROM
$
SUBJECT:
• UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Deputy Chief. Operations Staff, 0/31
Fulfillment of Requirement RDA-3345
DATE: 26 November 1952
1. This offices wishes to express its appreciation for
the excellent cooperation provided by your TONIC Branch in
connection with our requirement RDA-3345 concerning higher
education in Poland.
2. The material which we received met our need precisely
and enabled us to close out this requirement.
CSI/JBQuigley: bm
Distribution:
Orig and l
-
Forward
Hayden
HAD CHANN
1
1
1
-
-
-
Subject file
Daily reading file
Chrono
1.
-
Singel
1
-
Chief, SRD (W. Platt)
!
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_130.jpeg ---
14-00000
} .
J
-26-
4) Bookkeeper (possibly locally hired)
5) Quarters and living allowanes
(35% rough estimate : 819,775.00)
3.000.00
56,500.00
b. Exile Salaries
19,775.00
Total American Salaries
$76,275.00
24/2
1) 24178 National Section Chiefs and
Associates ut 250 per month
2) 10 paid onsistants for National
Sections at $150 per month
Total salaries Exiles and American
2. Travel in Europe und Maintenance of cars at
B200 each for 7 American staff members
(111400.00 per month)
83,500.00
10,000.00
277,775.00
16,000.00
3. Two Annual Kound trips U.3. Europe
2,000.00
4. Rent, stationery, telephone, etc. for
Deputy Director's office
6,000.00
5. Expenses (travel, stationery, postage, etc.
for 24 1/2 National Section Chiefs at 830
a month per person)
8,820.00
6. Monthly subsidies to Exile-Organized Refugee
Aid Committees
a. Bulgarian Refugee Committee
-
London
IL,
(Mrs. Karastoyanova)
3,000.00
b. Anglo-Czechoslovak Relief Committer (London)
3,000.00
c. Estonian Consulate
-
Welfare Division (London)
2,000.00
d. Latvian Helfare Association (London)
2,000.00
e. Lithuanian Welfare Committee (London)
1
2,000.00
f. Polish Ex-Combattuntą Association (London)
g. Anglo-Roumanian Relief (London)
10,800.00
5,400.00
h. Yugoslav Welfare Committee (London) through
B.A.F.C.Y.
2,000.00
1. Association des Réfugiés Bulgares en France
(raris)
4,800.00
;
i
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_129.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
35-
:
Italy
1) CAROMAN Trieste delegate and staff (Mr. D1 Demotrio)
3) Yugoblu Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
(Special Case).
a) Special case-
Albanions
b) Bulgarian Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
c) Czechoslovaka
-
nono
d) Estonians
->>
nono
e) Hungarian Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
f) Latvians - none
g) Lithuanians
- none
h) Polish Section Chief and one paid assistant to bo
recruited and appointed
1) Rumuniun Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
1) Yugoslav Section Chief to be recruited and appointed
(Special Case).
Note : In cases where no national section is provided due to the
insignificant numbers of refuge os ppresent or probablo,
it is assumed that the area Assistant ecule handle the
needs of special arrivals or cuses if existent.
B. PROPOSED ANNUAL BUDGET FOR FREE SUROPE COHBULAR BERVICE.
1; Salaries
a; Americans
1) Deputy Director
2) 5 Area Assistants at
$1,500.00 per year.
(the duties of the sixth Areu
Assistant, covering Prance,.
ance, Britain
and the Benelux countries might be
performed by a member of the staff
of the Paris office).
3) Executive Secretary to Deputy Director
$ 12,000.00
37,500.00
4,000.00
20
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_132.jpeg ---
:
!
14-00000
!
i
:
:
Aamation
29 July 1952
!
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, 10 Division
SUBJECT:
1.
Report of Ex-King Michael's Interost
in Rumanian Refugee Unity
Tranmitted herewith is a report which will be of interest
to the NCFE in its current negotiations with the Rumanian refugees..
2. The views of the King with regard to the Iron Guards and
others listed, are in agreement with those of this Division..
3. It is requested that arrangements be made for representatives
of the NCFE to meet with personnel of this Vivia on to discuss the current
negotiations' and utilizing this recent information..
Attachment
GRATIAN H. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Folicy Coordination, 85
SEGRET
Orig
Duria

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_133.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
24 July 1952
MEMORANDUM ECR: Chief, IO Division
SUBJECT:
G. Popescu-Botosani; J. Radovanj
J. Aron
1. This office has no objection, with respect
to security, to the employment of the three subject
Rumanians, who have requested State Department
assistance in getting on the NCFE payroll.
2. However, it is recommanded that no action
be taken on their behalf until the present attempt
to settle the refugee situation is completed, in
order to avoid any appearance of ECFE's favoring
one faction.
4 Attachmenta
Biographics
GRATIAN H. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, SB
SECRET
orig-Burker
j.
1
;

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_131.jpeg ---
"
:
14-00000
-27-
J. Comité d'Alde Sociale aux Réfugiés
Tchécoslovuques (raria)
k. Comit d'Entr'Aldo Botonien (Paria)
1. Comité des Réfugiés Hongrois (Paris)
m. Association d'Entr'Aide Letton en francé
(Paris)
n. Association Lithuanienne Bienfaisance
0. 0 ROMAN (Paris).
Bio (Paris)
p. Estonian National Committee (Cormany)
8 4,800.00
3,000.00
10,800.00
3,000.00
3,000.00
4,800.00
6,000.00
q. Hungarian Office and Hungarian Kollof
Action (Germany)
20,000.00
г. Latvian Hutional Committee and Latvian
Red Cross (Germany)
7,000.00
a. Lithuanian National Committee (Germany)
8,000.00
t. CAROMAN (Trieste)
1,200.00
7. Matérial costs of Implementation of PECE
Progrum (extra-curricular schools, reading rooms,
meetings, subscriptions, charts, posters,
publicity)
8. Welfare Fund
:
Total Annual Budget for FHC3
Capital Outlay in Initial Yours of Operation
a. purchase of cars at 1000 eac for uso
of 5 areas assistants in frontier countries
b. 10 one-way tripe U.S.-Europe for transpor-
tation to job of american prionnel (and
wives nd childred where they exist at.
1500 each)
!!!
c. Furniture and equipment for Deputy
Director's office
50,000.00
50,000.00
7417,695.00
5,000.00
5,000.00
700.00
Mary Augustine
-1-1-1-1-1-1-8-8-8-
Total
$ 10,700.00
Roger L. Bull

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_135.jpeg ---
14-00000
ime
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
REC
Bi
Fille
22 July 1952
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE ·
National Committee for a Free Europe
Attached is a memorandum which it is suggested be shown
to the Director of Central Intelligance in time for a scheduled
meeting of the Director, mombers of CIA, and members of the
Board of the National Committee for a Free Europe on Monday,
4 August.
Attachment
As stated.
CIO: TWB:sh
Orig
1 cc
-
->>
Addressee
ADD/A
1 cc - IO/TONIC
1 cc - CIO
RI
2 cc
L. K. MITTS
Acting Deputy Director
(Administration)
k.
CRET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_134.jpeg ---
14-00000
625-1
SECRET
Security Infert
To:
George Lofton
From:
Leonard I. Stam
July 22,1952
For your information I enclose a copy of
our contract letter with Leland Stowe. I send
you this because of the considerable discus-
sion of the case.
I can't tell you how much I appreciate
your consideration and help in this whole af-
fair. It really pulled us out of a deep, deep
hole. My very best.
Leonard 1. Stamm
:
JONIC
Attachment in ACFE files (atd 17 July)
:
SECRET
Security

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_138.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
:
1
13 July 1952
Dear Mr. Leat
I would appreciate it if you would deliver
this envelope to Mr. John C. Hughes, 10 Worth Street,
New York.
:
Thanks,
(5) Tom Braden
534
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_137.jpeg ---
14-00000.
!
:
}
BECKET
Rolocaration
which is attached as Appendix B. In brief, these comments bear out in
instance after instance the assertions sot forth above as to the fundamon-
tal difficulties with which we are faced in the administration of this
project.
.
5. The PRC already has reviewed this Agreement and the 1953 fiscal
year budget subritted by NCFE. The Committoo is co convinced of the
woakness of the present situation and the need for its improvement along
the lines suggested by the Nomorandum of Agreement that it has refused
to approve the budget of the NCFE until a satisfactory Memorandum of
and the budget resubmitted
Agreement is concluded in the manner prescribed therein.
only atemiatives, vi
6. mer is, how, a choice between basically two alternatives, viz.,
CIA either has a duty and responsibility to ensure, affirma-
tively, the conduct of the NCFE program in accordance with CIA's own special
mission and general responsibilities as a Government agency, or
The NCFE is an autonomous organization operating independently
in which event this Agency should
of any Goverment direction and co
control, in
formally abdicate the responsibilities with which it has been charged in
1...
this connection.
SECRET
Security taksimal
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_139.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
:
į
2203 Foxhall Road, N.W.
Washington, D.C.
17 July, 1952
Dear Johnı
I was glad of our meeting day before yesterday and
I am looking forward to seeing you soon again.
Here is a memorandum I addressed to A. a short time
read because it may give you.
trying to get to work hero.
ago which I would like you to
some indication of how we are
It is for your eyes only.
I talked to Min on the telephone this morning and he
seamed in an extremely bellicose most. This bellicosity,
replete with references to "little people who get in his
hair", "from now on I'm dealing only with the top", and
"otherwise there are going to be sons resignations here"
is difficult for me because I as partly Irish, and as ablo
to resign as the next man. I have succeeded, however, in
maintaining my Scotch heritage to the fore so far, and
since you assure me that none of this is personally directed
at myself, or people like Bill Dirkes on I persuaded to
come and help me or to the job that I am sincerely and
honestly trying to do, I will try to keep it there. It was
nevertheless awfully calming to have a chance for such a
good talk with you.
Enclosure
Mr. John Hughes
Mc Campbell & Company
40 North Street
New York, New York
Sincerely,
// I
=
:
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_136.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM TO:
DCI
DRAFT
SECRET
Security Information
21 July 1952
Richards mimo
SUBJECT:
Study of Worlding Relations between NCFE and CIA by
IO and AS/S
1. Following upon its assumption of responsibility for the NCFE
project, IO, aided by the AS/S, has undertaken over the past two months
has concluded
an investigation into the NCFE/CIA rolations. It is apparent that these
that
relations have deteriorated to a dangerous extent and the Agency has lost
control of the NCFE activity to a degree it can no longer ignore.
2. In general, the fundamental defect in the relationship is that
the NCFE has refused to recognize the legitimate duties and responsibilities
of CTA for the policies, financial administration, and security aspects
of the NCFE, and the latter has persisted in regarding itself as virtually
autonomous. The secondary weakness in the situation has been the inadequacy
and confusion of the procedures which were developed to maintain control
of
over aro pvaluation of NCFE's activities.
3. As examples of the consequences to which these weaknesses have
led, the following are cited: (here should be discussed illustrations of
specific problems such as those in your para. a.)
4. The remedy which is being developed az a consequence of this
investigation is the re-definition of the responsibilities of CIA and
authorities of NCFE and the development of new procedures for the conduct
of relations between HCFE and CIA. These definitions and procedures have
been reduced to a Memorandum of Agreement which has been prepared by CIA
and submitted to NCFE for study. A copy of this Agreement is attached as
Appendix A. The Senior Vice President of the NCFE has foxx reviewed
this Agreement in detail and has prepared his comments thereon, a copy of
SECRET
Security Information
:
'
¡
:
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_140.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Security Information:
EYES ONLYES
11 December 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Crusade for Freedom
3-5308
1. Admiral Miller will call upon the DDCI soon to request
more funds for the Crusade for Freedom. At the present rate of
expenditure, funds will run out on 31 December.
2. $488,991 was budgeted for the Crusade this year. We
have told Admiral Miller that since the Crusade was unable to
live within this budget, we were certain that the Agency would
appropriate more money to wind it up, although we have explained
that his request was embarrassing because the PRC had expressly.
approved $488,991 instead of a larger amount in the belief that
less money should be expended this year. We have naked Admiral
Miller to provide us with a financial statement of the Crusade
cost to date as well as a breakdown of the further amount needed.
3. The Crusade this year has so far cost only a quarter of
last year's expenditure and half of the amount exponded in 1950.
Receipts are up, 140% over last year at this date. On the whole,
a much better job has been done to date than we anticipated
and purely in terms of the amount raised the performance has
been superior.
4.
There is a good deal of gossip about the use of Crusade
funds and I think you should be acquainted with it. Because the
Crusade is a rather public enterprise, the gossip has occasionally
been sounded not only within NCFE and this Agency but also among
"semi-witting" private citizens who have been enlisted for short-
term fund-raising on an unpaid basis. The gossip is that a good
deal of money has found its way into the private hands of local
Crusade chairmen and workers. In one instance, it is said,
involving a local chairman in Minnesota, the amount which reached
private hands was enough to build a new home. Another story I have
heard repeated by different people on different occasions is that
in the state of Nevada and certain other locales no money received
by fund-raising chairmen last year was ever turned in to Head-
quarters, and no report ever made. Another item which some
SEOPET
Security Ingrination.
ELFSC CALY
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECURITY P
3-5294
!
11 December 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
University of the Saar
--
1. The University of the Saar was created on 8 March 1947.
It has four facilities two in Saarbrucken (Letters and Law)
and two in Hombourg (Medicine and Science). Faculty members are
French, German, Swiss, British and Saarois.
2.
A number of "institutes" exist with undefined relations
to the University though financed, as is the rest of the University,
by the French Government, and include a special institute for
interpreters, an institute for economic science, and a European
Institute. The support of the French Government of this University,
aside from its merits, is part of the French attempt to Europeanize
the Saar.
3. The European Institute, devoted to European unity, is a
recent creation and is largely the result of the promotions of
former Deputy, Andre Philip. It was the European Institute to
which the Herald Tribune article specifically refers.
4. The University participated extensively, especially the
European Institute, in the European Youth Campaign. Some of the
specific activities were as follows:
March 1952: The Campaign cooperated with the International
Institute of the University of Sarrebruck in arranging a
meeting of young professors in the Saar and another meeting
of youth leaders, both to discuss European problems. Films
were supplied by the Campaign for both these meetings.
By the end of April, 25 youth organizations (practically all)
in the Saar were associated with the Campaign. During April,
May, and June an extensive program of discussion groups was
arranged in the secondary schools throughout the Saar. These
groups were sponsored jointly by the Campaign and the youth
groups of the Saar. The groups discussed all phases of the
unity question but concentrated particularly on the Schuman
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_141.jpeg ---
!
14-00000
1
2
EYES ONLY
of the people in the New York office talk about is the payment of
$37,500 to Fred C. Smith, who worked for approximately one month
in drawing up a Dimes for Freedom campaign which, as you recall,
( was rejected as a basis for this year's campaign.
5. No accounting of Crusade funds expended in the field has
ever been made, and in a fund-raising campaign it is perhaps
impossible to do so. Nevertheless, records involving payments
for expense money to private citizens ongaged for the duration of
the campaign are chaotic. You will recall that Spencer Phenix,
Treasurer of NCFE, refuses to have anything to do with expenditures
for the Crusade.
.
6. Since we are winding up the Crusade this year and will
attempt to place it on a more reliable basis through the Heritage
Foundation, I suggest that you assure Admiral Miller that funds
sufficient to wind up the Crusade will be forthcoming and that you
instruct the 10 Division to expedite a project granting these
funds. I further suggest that in view of the allegations above,
which I repeat for your private background information, you keep the
position of the Agency faultless by requesting from Admiral Miller
a budget in as much detail as possible for the amount necessary to
liquidate the Crusade.
"
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SEOPET
SECURITY INRONATION
:
wi

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_142.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Setway lubomor
:
17 July 1952
MEMORANDUM TO: Acting Deputy Director (Administration)
Acting Chief, Administrativo Staff (Special)
PROM:
SUBJECT:
Conference with TPTONIC Management re TPTONIC/CIA
Agroamont
1. On 9 July 1952 Mr. Echolo and I conferred with the President and
the Treasurer of the TPTONIC organization regarding the fiscal portion of
the proposed Agreement to be reached between CIA and TPTONIC.
2. The purpose of the conference was to extend to the TPTONIC manage-
ment an offer of aid in the interpretation and implementation of the fiscal
phase of the Agreement in response to TONIC's request for assistance in
this connection.
3. Our statement of the Agency's position may be summarized briofly
as follows:
2.
The Agency is insistent upor. obtaining the detailed in-
formation regarding TONIC's activities which is essential in
and
order to fulfill the Agency's fundamental policy, fiscal,
security responsibilities. The great cizo to which TONIC has
grown makes it necessary for the Agency to take a closer interest
in TONIC's activities than it has in the past.
:
b. Although final concurrence in an Agreement has not been
reached by TONIC, it is necessary that revision of the financial
budget be commenced immediately if PRC budget approval is to be
obtained as soon as possible after a final Agreement has been
reached. The budget document must be expanded in order to pro-
vide reasonably detailed information not only as to proposed
changes from the previous year's activities but also regarding
the continuing activities as well. Without this additional in-
formation there is lacking sufficient data on which to base the
approval of any allotment of funds.
4. The President assured us that a revision of the budget would be
undertaken immediately to provide not only the information the Agency re-
quires but also to eliminate incompletely planned, vaguely foreseen require-
monts. He assured us that the revision would be completed in time to per-
mit a review, prior to its presentation to the PRC, for the purpose of
determining that the document attains the standards set forth in the Agree-
ment. The Treasurer concluded that he was sufficiently familiar with the
terms of the fiscal portion of the Agreement to be able to satisfy its
requirements, but promised to call upon us if he should desire further
clarification.
SECRET
Security Information
07/7001
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_144.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
:
ER 3-0917
15 July 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
National Committee for Free Europe; proposed
employment of Mr. Leland Stowe,
Nemo from Security Officer to DCI dated
12 January, and attachments.
1. As the result of an extensive consideration of the problem
created by the NCFE offer of employment to Leland Stowe, and in light
of the adverse information concerning Mr.Stove's past connections and
affiliations with certain organizations, it was decided by the Director
upon the recommendations of Mosers. Dulles, Hedden and the undersigned
that Mr. Stowe should not be employed by NCFɓ ns Chief of the RFE
information collection program.
2. When Admiral Miller was informed today of this decision, to-
gether with the reasons upon which it was based, he and his staff im-
mediately proceeded to re-examine the entire problem and within an
hour-and-one-half communicated to the undersigned an entirely new
proposition concerning Mr. Stowe, of which the following were the prin-
cipal elements,
4. In linu with the Director's decision, Mr. Stowe
would not be employed by NCFE as Chief of the information
collection activity of RFE
b. In lien thereof he would be offered a contract
as a "consultant and contributor of information" for a
six-months term.
C. He would not be offered a salary but would be
placed on a fee basis, and paid according to the amount
of work and material which he contributes.
d. Thus he will not become an official of RFF or
NCFE, and will not bo in such a position as to enable
anyone to maintain that he guides the policy of or con-
trols the flow of information to Radio Free Surope.
;
SECRET
Security Information
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_145.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
-> . 2
:
Subject to prior approval from our security office,
Admiral Miller and Mr. Lang will endeavor to secure the ser-
vices of either Mr. Cy Burgin of the Time-life organization,
or Mr. Russell Hill of the New York Herald Tribune as Chief
of the information collection activity of Radio Free Europe.
They are both regarded as compotent and experienced indivi-
duals, and Mr. Burgin has already indicated his interest in
this position if it were open.
1
3. The preponal described in the preceding paragraph was submit-
ted to Mr. Dulles and to Mr. Braden by the undersigned, and they both
exprossed their approval. Mr. Dulles said that, on the basis of our
discussion with the Director, he folt cortain that this arrangement
would be acceptable from the standpoint of CIA.
advised by the undersigned and expressed himself as being entirely
The Admiral was so
satisfied and very pleased. He undertook to check through Mr. Braden
on the acceptability from a security standpoint of Messrs. Burgin and
Hill.
4. One other aspect of this matter is worth recording for fauro
references Mr. Hadden has stated that he has been well acquainted with
Mr. Stowe for many years, having known him in college and having fol-
lowed his carcer rather closely. On the basis of everything ho. knowa
about Mr. Stowe, Mr. Hedden is convinced that Mr. Stowe is a loyal
American citizen and that there would be no real risk in his case on
the issue of loyalty as much. In the opinion of Mr. Heddon, Mr.
Stowe's pant proclivity for becoming involved with left-wing move-
ments (some of them presently regarded as subversive) is not a com-
mentary on his loyalty but rather on his judgment.
and during the war he was prone to hop onto popular bandwagons and
At times bofore
to take a line in his writings and broadcasts that seemed to be
popular at the time. In other words, he is an opportunist by
nature and prone to take up causer which appeal to him as having
wide
popular interest and support as of any given moment.
pensity on the part of Mr. Stowe is not without its professional and
This pro-
commercial aspects.
Encla
nees.
References.
DD/P-FGW/bjm
Distributions
-
Orig. = DCI, DDCI, IG
CC1
-
C/IO - 1 -
ER - 1
Security Officer
DD/P chrono
FRANK G. WISNER
with enclosures.
- 1
SECRET
..
1
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_146.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
;
→
C
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Iractive Ray stry
13.0787
14 July 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECION OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Transmittal of Papers on NCFE Views on Yugoslavia ·
1. Here are NC's views on Yugoslavia which you asked for.
2. I am worried about item d) in particular. The other items
may be justifiable on the grounds that we have to take care of
paoplo in this country, but iton d) may seem to be taking unnecessary
forward stops.
3. As you agrested, we have asked the State Department for a
review of the entire national council policy, and I am sure we will
get State's views on Yugoslavia at this time.
:
Thomas
Mames W. Braden
THORAS. BRADEN
Chiof
International Organisations Division
i
2 Attachments
1. Ltr to Allen Dulles from
Leonard Stamm dtd 7 July 52.
2. Memo dtd 2 July 52 ro NCFE
views on Yugoslavia.
!
:
CO:TWB:eh
Orig
-
1 cc
-
-
Addressee (thru PD/P)
CIO
10/1ONIC
2 ce
RI
2 cc -
!
SECRET
1
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_147.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
1
3.5643
18 December 1952
JD/1.1752
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Briefing of Secretary of the Army on 17 December
on MCF2 and CFA
1. On 17 December, I briefed Secretary of the Army Pace on
the subjects of the National Committee for Free Europe and the
Committee for a free Asia.
2.. The bisting covered both physical assets and concepts.
Secretary Pace asked many questions, for example:
a.
:
b.
C.
Reid NCFZ handle the problem of Yugoslav exiles
and at the same time use the Yugoslavian defection
as no argument in its broadcasts to Iron Curtain.
countries?
How much did the State Department have to say about
the day-to-day operations?.
The duties of the President?
In addition, he expressed great enthusiasm over the concept of the
two Committees and in general for the concept of covert psychological
warfare. He interrupted at one point to talk at some Length about
his bollof that while it was essential to continue to draft boys as
soldiers and produce rifles, it was just as essential, and in the
long run more conducive to ultimate peace, to wage the argument for
democracy to a questioning world in a covert manner. He indicated
that he thought very little of the government's overt propaganda
program and that from what he knew about the government's covert
program as conducted by CIA, it was the effective means to the end.
Thomas W. Braden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
i
i.
I
PREMAN
TAX
--
:
1
F
!
7
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_143.jpeg ---
14-00000
4.
->>>
2
-
:
SECRET
s
5. In order to avoid later Edsunderstandings wo set forth briefly
the concept of financial control contemplated in the budgot section of the
Agroamant. Wo noted that the Agency must have confidence that the programs
of the various TONIC divisions are carried out to the appro:dmato extent
proposed in the Agency approved budget since other Agency plans must be
synchronized harmoniously with TOMIC's approved program. Accordingly, the
principle of establishing an expenditure coiling for each of the TONIC
divisions is regarded by the Agency as fundamental with which intor-division
transfers without Agency approval, would be incompatible. We assured the
Prosident it positively was not the intent of the Agency to lift managerial
responsibility from TONIC's own hands, and that the controls contemplated
by the Agreement are aimed not at stifling managerial activity but rather
to the attainment of the minimum chacks which the Agency fools it must
insist upon in view of the scope and importance of the TOMIC program in
the fulfillment of the Agency's own responsibilities and mission.
6. The President expressed his appreciation of the Agency's viewpoint
in the mattor of financial control although he did not expressly commit
TOMIC to its adoption. He did, however, promise to undertake a point by
point review of the terms of the Agreement immediately so that the specific
areas of doubt or disagreement may be localized and disposed of in further
negotiations.
7. This Staff feels that there is in reality no misunderstanding of
the Agrement on the part of TONIC nor any lack of technical confidence
to carry out its terms. The problem of attaining and understanding, thoro-
fore, comes to nothing more than a determination by TONIC management to
accept the minimum of control upon which the Agency is insistent.
Distribution:
Acting DD/A - Orig.
CCC 1
-
IO Division
AS/S Chrono
-
-
1-
1
1
Frederick W. Richards
Acting Chief, Administrative
Staff (Special)
SECRET
Security Informativa
7
A
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_148.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
i
:
i
TO:
BUILDING
TRANSMITTAL SLIP
ROOM NO.
REMARKS
Sent
int to n.y.. 22 July 1957
Jo. Dundee:
the content of
Wesnio memo,
I chuile
aught to be relayed to
millen, Walch et al.
Return to & Hill for fill
FROM:
BUILDING
FORM NO. 36-8
SEP 1948
"
ROOM NO.
EXTENSION
SECRET
Security Information
14 July 1952
For miles
KEVORANDUM
I would certainly be inclined to agree with FW on the importance
of a dignified "worthy cause" sort of campaign. Moreover I would
scrupulously avoid any activity which might cast doubt on the food
faith of the Crusade (e.p., "We have our money for balloons at Christmas
where are they?")
REL
FEL
-
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
:
Plan due to the economic position of the Saar in this
matter.
Films and publications of the Campaign were used
in the discussions. 7000 students participated..
During June 1952, in cooperation with the Campaign, students
and professors of the International Institute formed a
· committee along with youth leaders to discuss the particular
problems of the Saar in a United Europe.
On March 27, 1952 the Campaign held a large study group in
cooperation with the European Institute of the University
of the Saar. Students attended from Aix, Hambourg, Oxford,
Tubingen, Leyden, Nancy, Berlin and Paris. Lecturers were
provided by the Campaign.
Braden
smes 70. Brou
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SSOUT
SECURITY P

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_149.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SPEJICT:
SECRET
Security Information
9 July 1952
ER 3-0732.
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Proposed Camusign of the Crusade for Freedom :
(ER 2-0686).
B
1. Please note the attached Inquiry from Tom Braden, in which
he rafees two questions with respect to balloons. The following are
my recommendations on the two questions, respectively:
2. I see no objection to reference by the Freedom
Crade campaign to the use of balloons, provided this-
handled with care. By this I hear that it would be
all right for the Crusade to refer to its former use of
balloons and the effectiveness of this nse, and also to
say that the National Committee for a free Europe will,
on an appropriate occasion and at the sight time, make
Forther use of balloons. It would be prone and unuise
for many reasons to make a flat staterent as to the exact
time and content of further balloon operations. There is
no point in thus telograshing our punch to the opposition,
and it would get us into trouble if we are to be too
specific about the timing and subject batter of any new
.
t. I would be very much opposed to the stunts such
as dropping Christmas leaflets out of balloons over packed
football stadiums. This is the kind of flamboyant public-
ity which we have agreed not to undertake this year, and
incidentally which makes us look as though we were in the
class with commercial azertisers or responsible and
playful student fans, or both! I thought Abbott
Washburn had gone to help Ike!
3-0686, utd 7 July
Encl (1)
DD/2-6/jm
FWkner
pier
MAN G. WISHER
Deputy Director (Plans).
:
Distribution:
Orig. addressee w/att
->
1 cc
1 cc
-
DD/P chrono
SECRET
Security information
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_152.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
02-
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
4. Tum has never talked with Congressman Ross. Tom did not
state to his secretary or to anyone else that Congress an itors'
Tom states
candidate might be able to get a position with you.
that he knows better for obvious reasons than to make any such
suggestion to anyone.
For your more complete information in this matter, a copy
of an internal memorandum is enclosed.
2.
Sincerely
/a/ H. B. Willer "
We should like to know if the information you obtained
from CIA parsonnel agrees with this report.
Encli-1. copy
10/TUNIC : NBV/hika
Distributions:
Orig:- Addresseo
2 co - C/10 ✓
10/TURIC
2 cc
2 co
-
->
RI
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
I
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_150.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET
7 July 1952
Executive Registry
.3-0.6377
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Request for Decision as to whether Crusade for
Freedom Campaign Boginning 15 November may usA
a Dropping of Leaflets Theme in its Propaganda.
i
1. Admiral Miller of NCFE has appointed a new head for Crusade
for Freedom, Mr. Richard Walsh, formerly of the State Department. Mr.
Walsh has submitted a new plan for the Crusade for Freedom campaign to
begin November 15. The campaign will be based upon the idea of send-
ing Christmas message leaflets behind the iron curtain with publicity
that the Crusade for Freedom will use balloons among other methods for
this purpose. It was originally contemplated that the Crusade would
in fact send balloons as it did last year. Bearing in mind, however,
the DCI's warning about using any propaganda device which might give
the Soviet a weapon in its bacteriological warfare campaign, we have
instructed the Crusade that there will be no actual transmission of
balloons.
2. Will it be permissible for the Crusade to publicize the use
of balloons, to employ such stunts as dropping the Christmas leaflets
out of balloons over packed football stadiums in the United States
and to give the general impression that balloons will be one of the
ways to carry messages from the American people behind the iron curtain,
even though they will in fact not be employed?
3. You will appreciate that an immediate decision is essential.
Thomas Braders
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
DDCI through DD/P
Distributions
->>
Original
ce: ADPC 1.
->
CIO 1
-
IO/TONIC
RI ->> 2
-
2
:
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_151.jpeg ---
14-00000
.J
:
:
SECRET
SECURITY CROMATION
14 July 1952
M:MORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
ME. MALTKR PFORZHEIMER
-
Office of the General Counsel
Follow-up on your report of 26 Juno 1952 re: Captain
Stanislaw Lakierka.
1. The following report of 2 July 1952, is a reply to our
presentation to the Admiral of the subject report:
"I have questioned Tom about the matter cited in your letter of
30 June 1952, File Number-3039. Tom states that the facts are as
fu.lows:
1. By letter dated March 20, 1952, Con ressman Robert Trip
Ross requested consider tion for the employment of Captain Oskierka.
the latter was interviewed on several occasions, and prospects of his
employment were fully exacined. After careful consideration, it do-
veloped, that Oskiarka was not useful in any division of our operation,
and there was no job for him. He was personally to informed by Tom
in a subsequent interview on May 6, 1952, in which Osklerka expressed
his understanding of the situation.
2. Under date of May 23, 1952, Congressman Ross again wroto us
stating that Ooklorka had contacted him again about the pas.bilities of
a job with us. I wrote the Congressman under date of June 5, 1952,
tolling him that, although we had made every effort to place him, we
ware unable to offer uaktorka a position.
"
3. On or about June 25, 1952, Congressman Russ' local secretary
telephoned my office inquiring about Osklerka. My secretary referred
her to Tim who then talked at some length with Congressran Rene'
secretary. He told the latter that we had no position for Uskierka
and that we had so informed the Congressman by letter abovo cited. In
the course of the conversation, the secretary inquired as to what
"Bugsections we could offer relative to such a position for skierka as
would be useful in procuring an extension of his visitors visa.
stated that he might sugest to the Congressman that ha eight makə
inquiry in usklerka's benalf in various Government age:cies in
šashin ton, stating that Lakierka seed to nive various useful
talents which might interest someone other than us.
SECRE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_153.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Memorandum
701
COPY
SECRL.
SECURITY INFORMATION
URITY
May 27, 1952
FRE
SUBJECT: Captain Stanislaw Uskiorka
There are no prospects for utilizing
Captain Cakierka's services by the Fund.
I must say that I do not like the behavior of
Oskiarka in again trying to pressure us via Congressman
hoss. As the attached file showe, he has been most
courteously treated here; every effort has been made to
place him; and he has expressed himself as being pleased
with the treatment and attention accorded him. I person-
ally informed him and explained in great detail that his
background made it impossible for us to use him here.
He stated to me that he thoroughly understood this and
that he was quite satisfied that we had examined the pro-
position thoroughly.
I don't supjoso that it can be told to Concross-
Ban Ross, but Bernie Yarrow has taken his whole story to
certain of our friends to explore the possibilities of their
possible interest in him since ho stated to me that he is
single and willing to go anywhere in the world to get into
the fight.
:
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_154.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
7 July 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: "CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION: DIVISION/OFC
FROM!
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
AC/RDD/OTS
Evaluation of New Type of Air Leaflet
(a) Memorandum for RDD/T83 Sub]: Request for
Appraisal of Weiss proposal to NCVE of
new type of air leaflet åtd 21 June 1952
(b) Telephone discussion between C/IOD/OPC
and AC/RDD/OTS on 3 July 1952
1. Subject proposal has been received and will be estab-
lished as RDD Ad Hoc. Project No. 23.
2. This project will be carried out along the lines dis-
cussed in Reference (b), which will require a number of field
experiments; therefore, some additional time will be needed for
Information will be forwarded to you
the complete evaluation.
on these trials as it becomes available.
3. It is noted that the samples attached to Reference (a)
are approximately 14" by 8". It is requested that you advise
whether or not this leaflet is large enough for applications.
you have in mind. In the event that it is not, trials will be
conducted with larger size leaflets of the same pattern.
LRD:hmg
L. R. DAILKY
Acting Chief
Research & Development
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_157.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
T
;
31 December 1953
MSMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Gregoire Gafencu
Memo to DCI dtd 10 Dec'53, same subject
1. Both Whitney Shepardson and Bernie Yarrow were un-
able to persuade. Gafencu to remain in the United States.
He left for Paris 12 December 1953.
2. As a result of his own decision, Gafencu was in-
formed it would not be possible for NCFE to continue support
of him so long as he stayed in Europe, as it is now a firm
NCFE policy not to give stipends to anyone oversoas. Pay-
ments to Gafencu will, therefore, terminate as of 31 March.
1954.
3. All the meetings between Mr. Shepardson and Gafenou
were entirely cordial.
Thamas)
as .
W.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief,
Braden
International Organizations Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
{
SECRET
Security Information
DD/P 135
10 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
SUBJECT
University of the Saar
1.
In the Sunday November ŷ issue of the New York Herald
Tribune there was a rather full and very interesting account
of the purposes and objectives of the University of the Sear,
which I an anxious for the addressees of the original and
copies of this memorandum to read. The writer of the piece has
evidently been much impressed with the efforts of this institution
in the field of advancing European unity, and if the account which
he gives is an accurate one, it seems to me that we enold (a) know
more about this and (b) give consideration to providing some
support for it if it is good. It might even prove to be the case
that this is a better and more deserving show than one of the
activities which we are currently supporting having similar
objectives. I think we are generally agreed that it is better to
get in behind and give support and encouragement to a movement
which has demonstrated the ability to stand on its om fest than
to try to create and sustain an activity which would not exist
but for our own contributions
2. I should appreciate receiving from you in due course
your estimate of the significance of this activity, etc.
cc: C/WE (Attention: Mr. Dulin)
C/EE
tsw
FRANK G. WISHER
Deputy Director (Plans)
:
SECRET
Security Into, matina
-

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_159.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED-
TO
-
1
"
4.
S
FROM
2
S
RESTRICTED
NFIDENTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
Chief/10 Division
Exes. Asst. to DCI
APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
[
SECRET
INITIALS
DATE
INITIALS
DATE
JSE/dr 12 Jan 54
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
SIGNATURE
RETURN
PREPARATION OF REPLY
DISPATCH
·RECOMMENDATION
FILE
Remarks:
memorandum.
The Director has noted the attached
He indicated to me that he had seen
Do you know what he
"something else on this".
refers to?
11.30.
988
JStarman
SECRET
FORM NG
SEP1947 30-4
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
1-89-449-41
UNCLASSIFIED
U. S. TENDENT PRISTINA OFFICE
"

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_158.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
'
10 December 1953
MISMORANDUM POR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL TETELLIGENCE AGENCY
SUBJECT:
VIAS Acting Chiof, International Organizations
Divisions
Grigoire Gafenou
1. I have just spoken to Whitney Enepardson and he reports
that he and Bernie Yarrow have been able to persuade Cafencu
to stay in the United States. Gafence gave zanj reasons for
wishing to live in Europe. He is leaving for Faris this Saturday.
'
2. As a result of his own decision, Gafanon was informed that
it would not he possible for NCFX to contims support of him so
long as he stayed in Europe, as it is now a fira ECFE policy not to
give stipends to anyone overseas. Payments to Gafenou will, there-
fore, teradnate as of 31 March 1954.
3. Hr. Shapardson stated that all of the meetings with
Cafenou wore entirely cordial.
10/Branch 1:WPD:jb
Distribution:
orig & 1
2cc
Addressee
-
10/Branch 1
CIO
RI
->>>
->
1cc
1cc
-
WIENIAM P. TURKEE
Chief
10/Branch 1
Safincia
'iti
the 12 Dec & attachment
SECRET (tr fromrs de Houelle 25 NOV53
Fafence returned to DC/
Security Information
t
20JAN
54
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_156.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
LASSIFIED
P
CONFIDEN:
NICTED
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SECRET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (checkimark insufficient).
before furtherhouting. This Routing and Record Shoot should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
C/10/1
POOM
DATE
TO
NO.
RIC'D
PWO'D
0794ERS
INITIALS
4.
NO.
10.4-7
DATE
31 Dec 53
COMMENTS
1.
2.
CIO
1.
DD/P
B.
8.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
C.IO
'O. 51-10
Tur
FOW:
23684
CET
I am sorry that through an
oversight the 10 Dec 53 memo to
DCI attached was neither routed
through nor a copy sent to you.
TWB
DD/Phited
10
SECRET
B. B. GOVERNT POINTING OFFICE
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
UNCLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_155.jpeg ---
0000
"CS" RECORD MATERIAL
JE DATE
1. THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.
2. RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES &
DISPOSITION SECTION, RM 65%, ON OR BEFORE
DATE INDICATED,
G.H-.50.
3. IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION 1578
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
FORM
12462 179a USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
3.
5.
6.
2D24
S. Corbat
06/EIK
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
RETURN TO GA-50
(43)
DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAYERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.
78-1129
432.373
748
copate #1314590
FILE NO. Wash CIA 00.37
15.
1P/ARD
Rm 60298
FORM
3-62
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
IMMED
RETURN
DOCUMENT:
FOLDER: 12
12 =
PAGE:
BOX:
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
3
UNCLASSIFIED
falder H
NCFE
Tenuary 1953-December 1953

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_160.jpeg ---
+
1
T
14-00000
7
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Director of Central Intelligence
5-0728
30 December 1953
Noted by But
11
Jan 54
E
:
SUBJECT:
Report that Sensitive Files covering Emigra
Activities may have been made Available to
Senator McCarthy
1.
The following report was made available to us by Eugene. Lyons,
former President of the American Comittee, who still actively partici-
pates in Committee activities as a policy adviser. Fr. Lyons is a mem-
ber of the Board of Directors of the American Friends for Russian Free-
dom, and he obtained this report from an unnamed source in the American
Friends' organization.
2. A man named Verbitsky (feu), living in Munich, has somehow
managed to obtain the personal files of Georgi Mueller, the NTS safe-
house keeper who was arrested as a Soviet agent last fall. These files
contain, among other things, a number of letters to Mueller from Gregori
Klimov, an influential erigre who is head of the emigre group known as
the League of Post War Defectors. These letters involve Klimov in
Mueller's activities, and implicate many other emigres. Verbitsky
attempted to tam these documents over to unnamed authorities in the
field; when he was ignored by these authorities, he mailed the entire
parcel to Senator Joseph McCarthy.
3. The American Committee naturally considers that this corres-
pondence, which, if it exists, no doubt contains a great deal of that
unfounded denonciation and allegation which is se typical of emigre
expression, may involve the American Committee as well as other matters
of particular concern to the Agency.
4. The Chief, SR Division, has been made aware of this report.
T
Chief/10
W
SECRET
8009

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_164.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
}
SECRET
Security Inlermates
->>
2.
all that it can to get him out of Paris and he recommends that a strong
invitation be extended by NCPE to Gafoncu to return to the United States,
and that this invitation be coupled with a statement to the effect that
in view of budgetary considerations and the very marginal value of
Gafencu's activities in Europe, it will not be possible for NCFS to
continue his stipend unless he returns to the United States and engages
hunsolf in activition more useful to the program of NCFE.
Original: C/10-
CC:
. DCI
C/WE
C/SE
FRANK G. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
P. S.
Since dictating this memorandum, I have received a report from
a well-informed Rumanian source to the effect that Cafonew has
returned to the United States within the past few days for the
purpose of remaining here indefinitely. (The fact of Cafencu's
return to the US has been positively established, and it is
possible that within the next day or so confirmation will be
obtained concerning his longer-range future intentions.) My
Rumanian informant has told me that the real reason for Gafencu's
return was an urgent request from Malaxa, who feels that he re-
quires Gafencu's present in the United States to assist him
(Malaxa) in government circles, etc. My Rumanian sourca is
prejudiced against Malaxa, but has maintained contact with
Gafencu notwithstanding this, and is convinced that Cafencu
is still on Malaxa's pay roll and subject to Malaxa's demands
for this reason.
SECRE
Security
:
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_165.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
29 December 1953
The League of Free Rumaniano
1
1. Correct title: The League of Free Rumanians.
2. The League has no offices but Barbu Niculescu is using
the late General Radescu's addross at 47 East 61st Street, New
York; telephone Plaza 9-5540.
"
3. Its officers and executive committee are attached under
Tab A.
4. Barbu Niculescu is Secretary General.
5. The Loague now has no offices and insofar as wo know has
discontinued publication of its bulletin. It is generally rumored
that the organization is supported by Malaxa and it is presumed
by knowledgeable people that in particular Malaxa supports Niculescu
and Mihail Farcasanu, the two most active League officers, as well
as Malaxa's nephew Jeorge Palade, who is a doctor in scientific
research with Rockefeller Institute in New York.
6. Attached is a letter from Panuch to yourself dated 2 Novom-
ber 1953, your memo to Chief, SE Division and his reply, which you
requested, as Tab B.
:
| Attachments
Tabs A and B
CIC:TB/eh
-
Orig
:
1 cc
->
1
1 sc
1 cc
->
-
Addressee
10/1:
CIA
KI
***** **THOMAS W. \BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_161.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
+
-SIFIED
RESTRICTED
SFIDENTIAL
GENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICAT.... TOP AND BOTTOM)
· CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
SECRET
TO
2
30/776
INITIALS
DATE
DR JANA
Mr. Thowas Brader - 1028 K
Res.
RWB
divers with we
3
clunkies
S
FROM
B 10281
Praten
INITIALS
-
2
7
3
DATE
St/1 31 Dec
APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
Remarks:
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
SIGNATURE
RETURN
PREPARATION OF REPLY
DISPATCH
FILE
RECOMMENDATION
3-5. Have po
about her will put
fadget. We are about to engag6
Khemes
A.
in copiar with agency units
infach with included.
bolll dress with
SECRET
*NO
1947 30-4
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED UNCLASSIFIED
10-03545-1
ENT PRINTING OFFICE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_162.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
30 December 19173
1
:
#
HEJORANDU
.
BRADEN
1. Professer Richard V. Burks of Wayne University is chair-
man of a small team of scholars engaged in a study of the
European satellites..
2.
The findings of this team are being given as the content
of a course on the mid-Luropean area. They are also, I believe,
being broadcast,
3. The tinge of Professer burks and his group is being pur-
chased by the i-uropean Study Center which is, as you may
know, under Mr. Stetson Holmes.
11. As yet Berks has no definite plan for the publication of
his findings. Manifestly, the kind of book which would emerge
from his research would have to receive some sort of subsidy.
As you know, books of this sort, if they are considered important
enough, are published as loss leaders by university presses.
Also, as you doubtless know, university presses are in pretty
straitened circumstances these days. If the Wayne University
Fress the normal place for the publication of Burks book
were to consider publishing the book, it might be able to publish
it only with outside assistance. The figure would run probably
between $1500 and $2000.*
--
In my opinion Burks is one of the most competent, if rot
the most competent man in the United States in this general field
of investigation. Anything he turns out will be about as good as
it comes. Although I have not seen any of this most recent work,
my hunch is that it will be enormously valuable to the policy-
maker and us estinators when the time cores for some deep thinking
and critical decisions about the European satellites.
6. I thought you might be interested in the above, and with
a little poking wound yourself night feel inclined to give the
venture whatever kind of beest seers appropriate.
Sherman Leve
Kene
SHERMAN KENT
Assistant Director
National Estimates
* P.S. The proven way to get the have work one of a scholar is to have
him know that it will be published & in normal course of events
judgment of his peers.
Submitted to the criticae
A

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_163.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
SECRET
Security Information
3.
1 December 1953
Current activities and behavior of Grigoire
Gafencu.
Paris 0615 (IN 37959) dated 28 November 1953.
1. The reference telegram from Paris contains a recommendation
that NCFE do what it can to prevail upon Gafencu to come back to the
United States and engage himself in certain activities which may be
of some use and value to NCFE. The following information was obtained
yesterday from Mr. Tyler who is familiar with the background of the
reference message.
2. Mr. Tyler stated that Mr. John Euphee has become somewhat
concerned about the activities and behavior of Cafencu in Europe, and
more especially in and around Paris, and although he does not believe
that a major issue needs to be made of this matter, he is firmly of
the opinion that Cafencu is not doing anything useful for the NCFE
in Europe and that the net effect of his activities is somewhat to
the disadvantage of the interests of the United States. Cafencu is
believed to be maintaining a rather close association with Guy de la
Tournelle (sp?) and his wife, who are described as "very sour apples
and bitter opponents of EDC." Gafencu is also reported to have been
involving himself with certain businessmen in France in a series of
questionable oil promotion schemes. He is also reported to have been
engaged in organizing a kind of information center in emigre circles
and to be selling this information to Agence France Presse. Moreover,.
Gafencu has been selling himself and "throwing his weight around" on
the basis of representations and strong intimations that he is a close
and intimate friend of Mr. Allen Dulles. liis utterances in this re-
gard are regarded by Mr. Hughes as highly indiscreet, the more so
since he appears to be living and entertaining on a scale sufficiently
lavish to suggest that he is being provided with substantial funds
well above the allowance granted to him by NCFE.
3. Mr. Hughes, as well as the Paris Station, fully appreciates
that NCFE is not in a position to force the return of Cafencu to the
United States. At the same time, he believes that NCFE should do
SECRET
Security Informal.os
DS/P 7643

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_167.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1 December 1953
MUNTANA FORT
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL UNT LIJURICH
VIA!
DEIOTY DIXFORD ()
SUBJECT:
Conversation with Loe Ponington
1.
On Friday, 11 December, I had a conversation with lea
Pennington, formerly of the 241 are recently appointed director of
the National Americanion Commission of the American Legion,
2. Pennington was most cordial. He showed a letter which
he had written to the members of the Americanor Corsion of the
Legion in which he dismissed charges against based principally
on an attack by Kurt Glaser. The arguments he used in his levar.
he had drawn from briefings by this money. He thinks that the .
will be the end of the matter and that members of his Cosion
will no longer press for investigation of NCKE and F.
3. I book this opportunity to brief Pennington thoroughly
the Moria Veterans Federation which the rector had previously
sentioned to him and about which he had had a little information
most of it faine. He had been under the impression that we nut
something to do with it but that it say a left-ing outfit which:
so ware Livestigating. At the end of our convernation he tol
that he was thoroughly entieried with the information I gave him
and that he would take two steps in accordance with my requ
3. He would notify the ford Foundation that the legion
Looked upon the world Veterans Federation as a Morzawhile
outfit and would certainly not criticing the foundation 12
it were to make a grant to the organization.
b,
He said he would prevent any attacks on the orgnatia-
tion coming from Legion resteers being given sertions co-
sideration. He said that viia could be taken care of by
referring; all such attacza) to the Quericanism
study.
tedssion for
CIDITWE/Ch
# 1
prae
1 cc
1 cc
1 ca
->>>
-
ressec8
- c/10/1
CIO
- RI
THOMAS .
Chiof
International Organizations Division
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_168.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
SPET
MEMORANDUM FOR, CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL O'DANIZATIONS DIVISION
MAJECT:
NAFERENCE:
14% Dummary Reports
Konorandum from 6/10, dated 17 November 1953,
Subject as above.
0001953
The appropriate E Branches and Stairs have read the RF summary
noport for jctober 1953, which you lorwarded to this Division as an
attachment to referenced memorandım. we have found the report woll
prepared and useful, both for SE Headquarters and for our fold
personnal working on propaganda projects. he would therefore appreciate
your sending this vision two copies of subsequent RFC monthly reports,
one of which will be retained by LE, while the other will be sent to
our Athens Station.
i
Adtrecuse: 2
L
!
ALEGTET
JOHN H. RICHARDSON
Chief, C
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_166.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
-
:
lags fide
on this
has been in wor
- week as you.
want to
Parasoll
add with
?
14: December 1963
MEKAHN MON DETUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS
SUBJECT:
Conversation with Edward W. Barrett
:
lie
1. I had a conversation with Rd Harrett on Friday,
11 December; who called to tell about recent developments
in respect to an Inter-European Radio Press Committoo.
described the history of Hana Colrsson's participation, with
which you are familiar, and he went on to say that the two-fold
objective at present is to get some sort of cooperation among
Buropean nations for brondcasting a frank discussion of foreign
affairs in each other's countries, and secondly, to enlist the
same sort of cooperation for a colum which would appear in
various countries, perhaps including this one, written by
different people and discussing each weak nome aspect of foreign'
policy differences which night exist between and among countries.
2. The idea seans to no a pretty good ons. Its principal
moset in that it will allow the airing and discussion of issues
among nations other than by diplomatic means,
3. Burrott pointed out that he is now, putting Cohrsson
definitely in a brick Boat, that he will soon cone to us with a
good responsible board of directors and officials Ho said
that he had enlisted Bob Lang's support and Bob had suggested
to him that NCFE give the institute a grant. Barrett said the
Instituto neado 25,000 to keen it going while it finds suitable
loadorship. I said that I would discuss the above with you and
I would look forward to hearing from. Lang.
:
:
CIOITVB/ah
Orig & 1
1 cc
1 cc
1 cc
->>
Addressee
DCIO, C/10/1
->>
-
CIO
-
- RI
BUNAL W
TAG HADEN
W
Chief
International Organisations Division
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_169.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
CHIFF, IO DIVISION
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
a.
4 December 1953
"News from Behind the Iron Curtain"
Subscription for Mr. Arvo Tuominen
OSSA-1638, 20 Nov 1953
->
Nail
b. Memorandum to WE/FP-1 from 10/Brunch I, 8 Oct 53
Memorandum to IOD/TONIC from WE/PP-1, 28 Sept 53
d. Memorandum to IOD/TONIC from WE/PP-1, 6 Juno 53
C.
1. A recent dispatch from the Stockholm Station (reference a)
reports that Mr. Tuominen is not receiving Subject publication. In
light of reference memorandum b, which states that he has been on
.
the mailing list since June 1952, it is apparent that there has been
some slip-up in the distribution channels of this publication.
check of address indicates that Mr. Tuominen's address is the same as
A
given in reference d.
2. It is requested that appropriate measures to taken to insure
that Mr. Tuominen will receive this publication in the future.
inform WE/PP-1 of the action taken regarding this matter.
Please
PAUL BIRDSAIL
C/WE
i
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
DD/P 135
10 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
: University of the Saar
SUBJECT
1. In the Sunday November 9 issue of the New York Herald
Tribune there was a rather full and very interesting account
of the purposes and objectives of the University of the Saar,
which I am anxious for the addressees of the original and
copies of this memorandum to read. The writer of the piece has
evidently been much impressed with the efforts of this institution
in the field of advancing European unity, and if the account which
he gives is an accurate one, it seems to me that we should (a) know
more about this and (b) give consideration to providing some
support for it if it is good. It might even prove to be the case
that this is a better and more deserving show than some of the
activities which we are currently supporting having similar
objectives. I think we are generally agreed that it is better to
get in behind and give support and encouragement to a movement
which has demonstrated the ability to stand on its own feet than
to try to create and sustain an activity which would not exist
but for our own contributions,
2. I should appreciate receiving from you in due course
your estimate of the significance of this activity, etc.
CC:
C/WE (Attention: Mr. Dulin)
C/EE
tsw
FRANK G. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
SECRET
Security Ialomitas
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_170.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
:
discussed orally! not cent
sent sterile version to
Whitney
River End, N. Robarts Lane
H. Arlington, Virginia
4 December 1953
Dear D'Arcy:
This is in reference to your telephone call of this afternoon,
I have just had a full report on the matter of the seven visitors.
I am afraid you have got yourself on the hock on this one und
nothing can be cone about it except to go through with the bargain
you made. This bargain, the documents indicate, was to bring the
seven Czecha over here and take the responsibility you assumed when
you signed the seven declarations of support affidavits.
Now having gotten that bad news off my chest, i hasten to add
that I do not think this is going to be burdensome wo yroll. You are
doing a real public service, as I shall explain in a moment, and all
of us will do our level best to help you.
I realize that you did not think you were assuring the responsi-
bility for seven people. It is clear, however, that everyone else
thought you were, and I think it is mimply too late to change it now.
The Csech regime is attacking the United States for its handling of
emigres; it is attacking the camps which you have seen; it is pointing
un the general hopelessness of an emigre's lot and the dullness and
dreariness which you have noted at first hami. This little trip of
our seven friends has set all the refugee circles in Germany gossiping.
It is exciting news. It is undoubtedly known behind the Curtain. To
call it off now would raks a real difference not just in terre of
the Crusade. but in terms of what raingeen think about the United
States and United States altizens.
"
--
The procedure from now on seans to lay itself out as follows:
The seven refugees will arrive sometime during the month of December.
Plús arrival dato is important. NICCG has made every effort to
expedite it so that they can come in December, and only overwhelming
ressons ought to dictate a postponement. They will go to work and do
whatever you, Clyde and Robb want them to do on behalf of the Crusade.
After their work for the Crusade is over, all sever doubtless will
wish to remain in the United States. We will all then jointly try
to find jobs and places for them. The visas are good until next
April, but if they can find jobs here it will probably be possible
for us to secure special legislation for them to stay in indefinitely.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_171.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
2.
Now as to the questions you raise in your letter of November 24th.
The National Committed for a free Europe should certainly look after
these peonlo whan they arrive and while they are here except insofar
as they are directed by you to take un certain activities on behalf of
the Cri8ude. The National Committee should also cooperate in trying to
help you in your effort to find jobs for them when their tour is over,
and I am sure the people there will do their best. I am sending a
copy of this note to Whitney and I know that he will cooperato to
Ens fullest,
As to your sectial question, I think the expenses of all seven
ought to be paid for out of Cresada funds. They are over here on
behalf of the Crusade and you are the one who asked them to come.
On the third question, as I indicated above, I think it would
be a great blow to United States policies in this field if they were
to turn around alter their duties were over and limp back to a dusty
refugee camp..
I think this is the way the whole thing ought to rest now and I
65 most earnestly urge you not to be too concerned about your personal
responsibilities. No will all be lucky if we have to tackle no tougher
problems.
Fr. D'Arcy Brophy
American Heritage Foundation
345 2. 46th Street
he* York 17, New York
J'
ses Mr. Whitney Shepardson
CIO:TWB/eh
Orig - Addressee
1 ce
->
Mr. Shepards m
:
RI
i
1 cc - 1Ɔ/Brl
1 cc CIO 1 ce -
-
:
Sincerely,
!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_172.jpeg ---
14-00000
Sunty Inform
245/1953
MEMORANDUH FOR: Doputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT
Tumanian Emigro Organization
REFERENCE
Pemorandum to Chief, SE from Deputy Director (Plans),
dated 5 November 1953 - Subject: Rumanian National
Council
1.
In agreement with Mr. William Durkes of International
Organisations Division, I share your view, as stated in paragraph 3
of the referenced monorandus, that HP. Anthony Panuch should discuss
the problem of the organization of Rumanian refugees with the SCFE
rather than uḍth this Agency. We were informed by Mr. Durkee that
Mr. Panuch is fully aware of the ECKE position that the refugees.
should resolve their own differences before presenting a solution
for the consideration of the HCFE. Mr. Durkeo also informed the
Romanian Branch on 13 November that he had discussed this matter
with Mr. Whitney Shepardson who concurred in the view stated above,
2. With reference to Mr. Panuch's statement that the "League
in its present state is a useful operational vehicle," namo traces
reveal that fourteen members are Iron Quardists, five are suspected
communist agents and four admit that they are on Nicolae Malaxa's
payroll. Because of this unsavory composition, it appears unlikely
that the League as presently composed would be useful operationally.
:
cc: C/PP
C/10/PP
10/PP (Mr. Durkee)
General Counsal
JOHN H. RICHARUSON
Chief, SR

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_174.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2
I
to above and cite thin as an example of why I would prefer
to stay out of the matter directly.
11. A copy of this memorandum in furnished to Mr. Houston
because of hla knowledge of the backround of the old malaża
allegations, and the difficultice which Malaza to capable of
creating for the Agency in the future. It will be recalled
that Malaxa has charged that CIA has injected itself into the
matter of his immigration status; that I have wrongfully
involved myself in his affairs including nomo 'ridiculous
charge that 1 kept him from getting a lucrative contract with
the Califomia Steel Company, etc., etc. -- none of which haa
any foundation in truth whatsoever,
(Signed) FRANK G. WISHER
FRANK G. INT
Deputy Director (Plans)
Attachment (1)
Letter to Mr. Wiener from
Mr. Panuch dated 2 November 1953.
CC 1
c/rp
C/10/PP
ID/PF (Mr. Durkee)
General Counsel
i
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_175.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
P
Y.
:
Law Offices of
J. ANTHONY BARUCH
60 East 42nd Street
Now York 17,H.Y.
:
Hom, Prank Wisner
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C.
Dear Prunk i
November 2, 1953
Confidential
Re: Romanian National Commcil
This is to bring you up to date on the aftermath of our
conference of June 17th with respect to the above. On my retur
to New York I took the following stope;
1. Personally bubmited the settlement formula to
Mica Georgescu for mediation with Visolanu and Creteianu, and to.
Larry Dellaufville for the information of the NCFK. Rica, in my
opinion unwisely, took the position that the formula was not
negotiable.
2. Directed the League to transit the formula to
King Mihail for his information and action and, panding final
acceptance or rejection to "iny off" visavin Crotaianu, visoinnu
ot al. This was done.
3. Summoned Malaxa and the officials of the Loague to
(a) inform thea of the false char es made to the White House by
Malaxa ovainst you in 1951 end to demand their formal retractiom
and (b) insist that Malaxa immediately make good on his content
to General Racescu that he set up an independent "no strings attached"
budget for the League an undertakin; then ix months in default.
Malaxa agreed to comply with both demands and asked for time to the
beginning of September when he hoped he would be released of the
strain and mental anguish incident to hid chronic immigration
proceeding. Malaxa defaulted on both promises.
--
4. I issued an ultimatum to the leaders of the League to the
effect that irrespective of my friendship with General Radeɛcu,
unless they disassociated themselves completely from Relaxa and
any semblance of his influence -- direct or indirect I would
resign as the League counsel. This severance of their relationship
with Malaxa has been accomplished after a story showdown session
between Farcasanu and Niculescu and Halaya,
--

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_176.jpeg ---
14-00000
Mr. Frank Wiuner
:
-
r
The League in its present state is in my opinion a useful
operational vehicle in any Romanian situation in which the utiliza-
tion of skilled and experienced parsonnel (notably arcemenu and
Niculescu) of conservative and non-Marxist political orientation
in Indicated. If you are at all interested in its such, I should
be glad to talk to you about it.
with beat records,.
Faithfully,
2
/s/ Jon Panneb
18.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_173.jpeg ---
*14-00000
:
i
SECRET
Security Information
5 November 1953
MEMORANTAM FOR: Chief, Southeastern European Division
SUBJECT
Rumanian National Council
BS
1. The attention of the Division and Mears. Braden
and Durkes is invited to the attached copy of a letter which
I have just received from J. Anthony (Joe) Panuch concerning
certain recent developments in the Rumanim emigre situation
and with particular reference to the "league." You will note
that Mr. Panuch has indicated that if we are interested in the
League and its possibilities, he would be glad to talk to us
about it.
4
2. I believe that the addressees of this memorandum vill
recall the significance of fir. Panuch as the role which he has
played recently, including bis vinit to me of chout two or three
months ago.
(I was annoyed by and considered as a minor breach
of conficence the reference which was made to my name in the
material which was published concerning a communication actressed
to King Mici:sel, although I did note that this contained no
representation that i had taken a position one way or another
concerning the League or the proposed formula for resolving
differences Letween the two principal Rumanian amire factions.)
3. As regards the proposal of further conversations
between Kr.ch either myself or some other spokesan
or representative of this Agency, I continue to be inclined to
the view that these are matters which should be taken up by
Mr. Famuch with Ar. Shepardson and not ourselves.
consultation between the Division and [J Division it is
If after
agreed that this is the correct position, I should appreciate
it if Mr. Braden or r. Burke' could talk with dr. brepardson
about this letter and obtain his views for my banefit.
then be in a better position to reply to hr. Panuch's letter
I would
presumably telling him that in line with my earlier advice to
him, I still would recomend that he raise these matters with
HCFK and not CIA. I could also add that i had been troubled ·
by the appearance of my name in the published material referred
SECRETS
1-formation
7267

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_177.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
. Honoraty President
HUPETER 1. HLETKO
President
PHILLIP A. HROBÁK
10. Don 180
Middletown, Pa.
Vice-Predient
MICHAKH BINCHAK
333 Rehoonmaker Ave.
Monesson, Pa.
EXECUTIVE. COMMITTLE
PAUL, I. JAMRIAKA
A10 Montooth Street
19ttsburgh 10, Pa.
JOSEPH 01. PRÚRA
205 Madison Street
l'assale. N. J.
JOHN J. BIROTNAX
410-013 Lincoln Tr. 148.
Scranton 8. Pa.
DR. JULIUH JANCI
311 W. King Street
Owosso, Mich.
STEPHANIE O. HUDEK
Georgian Court College
Lakewood, N. J.
Vice President
JULIA KRAJCOVIC
1845 W. 19th Street
Chicago &. I.
Recording Recretary
FRANCIR HRURGYOKT
10510 Buckaya Road
Cleveland 4. Ohio
Booretary-Treasurer
FRANK J. GURCAR
4786 Baptist Road
Pillsburgh 37, Pa.
The Slovak League of America
A Cultural and Civic Federation of Americans of Slovak Descent
Organized 1937 in Cleveland, Ohlo,
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
PHILIP A. HROBAK
P. O. Box 150
MIDDLETOWN, PA.
October 31, 1952
ADVISORY COUNCIL
MICHAEL J. VAROOVICH
National President
First Catholle Slovak
Unteo of U. 8. A.
HELEN KOCAN
National President
Pret Catholle. Slovak
ladies l'olon
FRANK BORUS !
National President
Slovak Cathollo Dokol
STEPHEN J. TKACH.
National President
Penna. Slovak Unioo
GABRIELA E. VAVREK
National President
Ladies Pennsylvania
Novak Unles
JONN ROZBORIL
National President
Merah Catholle
Cadet Unloa
JJ.b..
;
Mr. Kurt Glaser
1717. - 50th St., 11.4.
Washington 9, D.C.
Dom Mr. Glaser:
I have read your artiole on Radio Free Europe
THE "RUSSIA FIRST" BOYS IN RADIO "FREE EUROPE" - and I must
Buy that it agrees with the facts as I know them. It is
regrettable that such knowledge or information cannot get
to the masses of the American public. I have visited the
State Department and the National Committee for a Free Europe
Beveral times during the past two yours to a prize them
of the situation, but it seems they do not choose to do much
about it. I had my information directly and indirectly from
Slovak refugees in Germany and Austria....and London.
In December, 1951, the ASSOCIATION OF SLOVAKS IN GREAT
RITAIN, sent a "Memorandum" to the Nat 1 Committee for a
Free Europe in New York stating, interfect, the very things
your article contains. The personnel or RFE in Munich was
Given in toto. At that time 51 program editors wore employed
by ERE
29 Checks end 2 Sloveks (renegades). Of the 29 Czechs
employed - 27 were SOCIALISTS of one brand or another! The
momo montions who they were.... I still hove that list.
and
Shoula you want to use it, you are Nol cor e to it.
-
.
I have long been convinced that it is not in the newww
interests of Nerica or other free countries to employ pseudo-
Mats and left-wingers in the EFE, the Voice of America
11. ......
t. governmental agencies. I simply would not trust
enes the charlatuns in RFE or used by
the Retha I certainly you mond its publication. I,
For one, certainly would!
them. Yolly
:
Sincerely,
A. Hrobak

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_179.jpeg ---
---
:
14-00000
]
2
"
i
J
01
2
¡ini
2 of Justice; ¡w.Pusnek Del y te
1
100
to 110,0
niad air d
Telp Ambor one in celo-Glovnitie.
on 1540, Colore Providency of the Glove':
tion 1 Contil I visited : great do that
being crccted in oth-low tie /vo.I not to of
'
' '
Priends lost ege tonttin Lore ar nolfblend
Tended to see ith that.
dp book
Franeli
risomers and
At about that the] P.Jan Frommel sublimod in America
Cit ago 120 he
je
choslovalnic"/International University Press,lkw York/.
cynre a no-called Bolshevi's danger,a bogey i̇'or
Thy nations, en only in Chechoslovakia, because the
tairen caldy
Inver was free of very vertice of feudalism and its democracy
was
asso #11-a brucing and mucconful, that there remainded no class.
vione dinnatisraction could lead to the acceptance of Communism
e possible Pentody for it."
un th the very tine,then the "ational Front"Govern-
Tent tan oli dinding Slove's one och intriots by Mostly Communist
Pond's Contoh derisoning then in "Labor cos",å….?º.
ja much ums playing in the USA thụ polo mite Wesher of Communism.
Lo] Gentlemen vould like to change their tone.
=
tostimony of Onech Comunists themselves are convincing
then of comble dealing the "Council of Free Czechoslovakia"
is in outed even mov by "Yellow-tellers", it has been roved
by the "Coating adore the Sibeonitted to investito the
inistration ofthe Internal Security Act and other Internal
Dechrity of the Comittee on the Judiciary,United States
by babit. Con treas,First and Second Lession on Espiona e

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_178.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
• veil
1
Strtenent.
I rond with attention and interest the article
myho “turnia First boys in Andio Free Europe'", by ir.kirt Closer.
Erving no docivientation on hand in order to verify
ni
all particuler afirmations contined in this article,I con ez-
prend my entire adhesion to its teneral line.I lived in Concho-
Slovakis between 1945 and 1940 and I know the policy or the "-
nal front "Goverment in at that time from my personal
experience,
;
o
In order to understand the Marxist tendency of
some present politicions grouped in the so-called "Council of
Free Czechoslovakia", it is necessary to point out that the Czech
National Socialist Party of Mr.Beneü,hr.Zenkl,Mr.Ripko,Mr.Stran-
sky,etc. formed, on June 25th, 1945, the "Front of Working People"
with the pro-Communist Social Democratic Pabby of Er.Fierlinger,
Mr.Lauschman and Mr.Mojor and with the Communist Party of Mr.Got-
twald.That "Front" constituted the closest ring of socialist
solidarity and common action within the "Hational Front"Govern-
ment composed of two more parties: the Czech Catholics and the
Slovak Democrats./See the article "Let us say the truth!", by
Dr.Michal Zibrin, former Deputy of Blovek: Donocratic Forty in
Prague Parliament, published in "Jednote", on October 29th, 1992,
Mildletown,Fa./This ring of the three Czech socialist parties
is responsible for the evolution in the policy of Crecho-lovalin
until February 1946.
The Government of the "intional Pront", of which,
Mr.Zenkl was then Vice-Presior,ipho Minister of Foreign

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_180.jpeg ---
14-00000
d
3
Bū
nies
netivibios
1
UN
J
ar: onnel arched to ios and Consulates
* Soviet doinction in the United States.July 9,1991-
to harvaar. Die aged 7,1902. United States dov ricient Printing Orfice,
7,1992.United
shington 1992-10.57249.
On page 7 one can read the testimony of Mr. Joseph.
Igneoli,gent of F.B.I.Speaking of Mr.Emin Munk, l'ormer
organizer of Czech Red Espionage network in USA,Ir.Lolnir said:
"He" /ir.funk/told me that wo had a very-well- organized
under-round movement which was giving them a lot of headaches,
Hore then the antional Council for Tree Czechoslova ia,with
its political prestige and its chairman,Peter “enkl.
"He are not afraid, "he said, "of Zenkl and his organi-
zation because we have there our men who even hold higher po-
sitions and we can render them harmless whenever we wish."
The "Council of Froe Czechoslovakia", against a strong
opposition of anti-Communist Czechs and Slovaks, has been
recognized by the "ational Committee for a'Free Europe as
a representative body of Jach and Slovak refugees.In this
quality, it is a recruiting office for the personnel of the
Redio "Free Eurone".
Washington D.C.Hova:ber195?
Joseph A. Mikur
former diplomat of the C cho-Slovak inistry of Foreign Affairs
:
in Pragno /1935-1939/,
Former Chargé d'Affaires of Slovar in arid /1940-1944/.
Former Counsellor of the residency of the Sloval: National Council
in Dr: tislava 1940-1948/.
11

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
10 December 1954
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Call by Spencer Phenix on DDCI
Bration Regist
3.52
1. Spencer Phenix will call upon the DDCI Friday for the
purpose of taking up with hum certain questions among which are
the following:
a. A gymnasium for the Strasbourg University. The history
of the gymnasium request is as follows:
--
On 8 August 1952, at a meeting of the PRC, NCFE
proposed capital expenditures of $377,500 for the
Free University in Exile. This amount was placed in
a reserve fund along with other requested budget items.
It was agreed that funds held in this reserve could be
released to NCFE by the DD/F in conjunction with the
DD/A if in their Judgment the submission of further
data justified such expenditures.
On 17 September 1952, Spencer Phenix, for NCFE,
made a request for $47,000 to be released from the CIA-)
held reserve for the construction of a gymnasium at the
Free University.
This request was rejected by the DD/P. He said he
would reconsider the request if further data supported
it.
On 8 October 1952, Mr. Phenix made another request
supplying further data. This time the request was
reduced to $43,500. This request was also rejected by
the DD/P.
SECKET
Security Internation

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_181.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
¡
16-A Supes World-Hera
Omaha, Nov
2, 1952
Radio Europe
'Houses Reds'
Station Got Millions
From Americans
By Dr. John B. Crane
Frankfurt, Germany.
‚“You would do well to make an,
westigation of Radio Free.
umpe." a prominent Washington
wmaker advised me a few weeks;
go as we were having ten
*ther near Heidelberg.
"I have just returned from
"unich." he continued, "where I
spected both the facilities of the
oice of America and of 'Radio'
Free Europe. I was much im-
Creased with the Voice of America
t-up and find they are doing a
very good joh
"But when I called at the plant
Radio Free Europe I got such
frosty reception I could hardly,
"lieve it. They tried to be polite
but were obviously delighted when,
1 left. I figured maybe they had
heard of my vigorous anti-Com-
munist campaign when I ran for
re-election."
Makes Headlines
Within the past month at least,
three other visiting American offi.
cials have tipped me off that I
ought to investigate Radio Free
Europe. The climax was reached
Inday when a Washington investi.
nator suddenly appeared at my
apartment for a chat and casually
Ennounced he was headed for.
Munich. When I inquired why, he
replied:
"I want to inspect Radio Free-
Europe."
During the past week Radio
Free Europe has twice made head-
lines in leading German periodi-:
cals. One important weekly paper..
the Rheinischer Merkur, devoted
on entire page to the problem of:
Radio Free Europe.
70 Millions from Americans
American readers will doubtless
remember with what high hopes
this radio broadcasting station was
started two years ago under the
Sponsorship of outstanding private
American citizens such as Gen.
Lucius D. Clay, former American'
Military Governor in Germany.
The purpose of the new broad.
casting station was to send pro-
grams behind the Iron Curtain to
Peland, Czechoslovakia and other
satellite countries to encourage
them to hold out against their
Communist Governments.
Millions of Americans welcomed
this new weapon in the cold war
agat communism and contrib-
ute 70 million dollars for its sup-
port; according to the German
presa.
.
Anti-German Propaganda
The money was to be spent not
only for building and equipping a
broadcast station, but also for
financing the escape of refugees,
from countries behind the Iron
Curtain and giving thêm jobs at;
the new station in Munich.
Now come leading articles. In
the German press charging that
Radio Free Europe is heavily in
filtrated with Communists and
that pro-Communist, anti-German
propaganda is being fed to conn-
tries behind the Iron Curtain.
1
The well-known German werk--
Jy. Christ Un Welt, states that
seven menibers of the Czech De.
partment of Radio Free Europe:
have recently been arrested on:
auspicion of espionage, while one,
member, after working for severali
months, was found to be a Com-j
munist agent and fled over the!
border into Carchoslovakia with
important personal records of
Czecho emigrants' families.
'Saw the Light'
The German paper names names
and places. For exainple, it charges.
that the executive editor of the:
Czech Division of Radio Free
Europe, Pavel Tigrid, was editor}
of an illegal, Communist paper in;
1912 known as Hallo Noviny.
It charges, further, that during
the German occupation of Czecho-|
alovakis Tigrid co-operated closely:
with an important Communist'
leader, Fucik, who had become'
editor of the Communist paper
Rude Pravo. Tigrid was a cons
tributor to the Communist Central
Party organ when the war ended
in 1943.
Shortly thereafter, however, he
“saw the light" and fled to Ger-
many as a refugee. Soon he was
executive editor of the Munich,
radio station fighting communism.
Demand Shake-Up
The German paper further men-!
tions name five other promi-
nent employer of Radio Free
Europe who were, earlier, Com-
munist Party members or who to-
day have close relatives in im-
portant Communist Party posts in
Czechoslovakia.
The Germans are demanding a
drastic reorganization of Radio
Free Europe. This seems to be on
the point of being realized. It is
reported that 25 employes of the:
organization have already
signed, and that Executive Editor,
Tigrid tabas Paul Dittrich) has,
submitted his resignation..
It is to be hoped that the
“housecleaning" now in progress
will put an end to the many ugly ·
rumors that have been floating:
around about Radio Free Europe
for the last several months. 1
D.I'

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_185.jpeg ---
14-00000
:.
- 2
-
here.
Highlights aroi
a.
Roughly 150,000 people under his jurisdiction.
!
Mission centers have been established in Great Britain,
Austria, Germany, Italy, Argentina, Trieste, Spain and France.
b.
C.
areas.
Kirk la assisted by thirty priests located in the above
6. Kirk is now in the United States and intends to return early
in November. He is visiting NOPE in New York next week.
chief, Archbishonara is now Nuncio for Ireland with headquarters
His form
in Dublin.
7.
Statements made by Monseigneur Kirk in visits to NCFE
together with extracts from correspondence are available if you
should wish me to scan these and form an estimate of my own.
10/BrI:WPD-TWB/eh
Orig & 1
1 cc
1 cc
1 cc
-
-
->
-
Addressees
10/Bri
CIO
RI
A
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
T
71 [FORTATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_186.jpeg ---
"-
14-00000
SECUGH
"
DRAFT
19 October 1953
Jamming of western broadcasts to Russia began sporadically la
1948 and was well established by early 1949, first against VOA then
also against BBC. Satellite language program Jamming began¨first
from Russian stations and then from Jamming stations located in the
Satellites proper. When RFE transmissions began in 1950, the
organisation and equipment were available for the new target.
•
including
At the present time, the organization for Jamming
the transmitters, the monitoring stations to watch for the undesired
programs, and the control network to direct the jammers to the target
is apparently integrated throughout the Bloo, with a certain amount
of cooperation between countries. That is, programs directed to one
Satellite country may be jammed not only from within the country but
from Russia and from neighboring Satellites.
At least some of the jammers are closely controlled so that
efforts to evade them by changes in frequency or schedules are frequently
met by a prompt reaction on the part of the jammer
or less.
--
within a minute.
The extent of integration of the total Bloc jamming system makes
it very difficult to separate the effort contributed within the Satellites.
However, it is presently estimated that; about 900 transmitters are in
the jamming effort within the Bloo, and these appear to be fairly well
distributed throughout the total of the frequencies that are being used
at any given time. Therefore, at times when RFE is broadcasting to
the Satellite countries with a considerable number of frequencies, there
are undoubtedly hundreds of transmitters jamming these frequencies.
SELET
SECCATI
NATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_187.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
ATION
DRAFT
19 October 1953
The effectiveness of the jamming is difficult to assess quanti-
tatively from the few available observation locations within the Orbit
and from the fan mail received. However, in general, it is apparent
that jamming is most effective in large cities approaching 100%.
In rural areas, the picture varies from time to time and from place
to place, but it appears that a considerable proportion of the programs
to the Satellites can be received. For example, the RFT monitor in
Vienna reported that, at that location, the medium frequency Czech
broadcast from Holzkirchen on 719 ke van practically 100% Jamned
while only about 50% of the shortwave Czech programs were not intel-
ligible. The Embassy in Warsaw reported in May that while VOA pro-
grams were unintelligible, HFE programs were "often intelligible."
:
SECURIT
CIATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_184.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
$
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
23 October 1953
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIOSNOS
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
Monseigneur John C. Kirk
1.
You asked me by telephone for a report on subject, who la
domestic prolate on leave from the Savannah-Atlanta diocese in Georgia.
2. Monseigneur Kirk was formerly secretary to Archbishop Gorald P.
O'Hara, Bishop of the Savannah-Atlanta diocese, and also his secretary
wile Bishop O'Hara was Apostolic Nuncio to Numania from 1946 until
O'Hara's official expulsion in July of 1950. (MCFK has been reliably
informed that Kirk remained behind in Rumania disguised as a Swiss
tourist. He visited many of the imrisoned hierarchy but eventually
oscaped. This report is without objective verification.)
3. Because no single member of the Rumanian hierarchy escaped,
Xirk was appointed as president of the Rumanian Catholic Mission for
Europe, The headquarters of the Mission in Row Passeggiata del
Gianicolo 5, Rome. Monseigneur Kirk resides at Via Panama 110, Rome.
4. While in the United States in 1952 as personal delegate of
Cardinal Tisserant to the convention of the association of Rumanian
Catholies in America, Kirk visited the office of NCFS. Nombers of
the staff not with him on five occasions and made the following:
estimate
As a prolate on leave in a southern diocese, Kirk can
be classified as a religious liberal interested in the
batterment of various classes and, particularly the Negro..
In Rumanian polition, ha vigorously resisted the influence
of the iron guard. Evidence of this is that in 1952 Kirk
moved the headquarters of the Mission from Andrid, where it
was located at Calle de Sorrano 30, because of continuing
attempts of the iron guardists to use him for political
purposes.
5. A detailed account of the principal purposes and scope of
the Rumanian Catholic Mission for Europe which Kirk heads is available
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_182.jpeg ---
N
I
(A)
2
SLOVAR NEWSLETT
14-00000

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_188.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
L
15 October 1953
MKM RANDLM FOR: INSPECTOR GENERAL
SUBJECT:
Salary Information on NCFE People
i
1. Subsequent to Mr. Durkeo's memorandum to you of
1 September 1953, which we discussed this morning, I learned
that Hr. Dulles discussed with Mr. Shepardson the need for
the information as to the salaries of NCFE people. Very
likely this conversation was held pursuant to your own talk
with the Eructor.
2. In any event, we have received precisely the informa-
tion requested by the Inspector General in a memorandum of
6 October, and I have forwarded it to Win Scott.
3. I think your effort has been successful.
CIO:TWB/eh
Orig
->>>
1 cc -
1
cc
1 cc
->
->
Addressse
10/5r1
CIO
RI
:
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chiar
International Organisations Division
SECURITY INREDATION
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_189.jpeg ---
14-00000
15 October 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Dr. Francis Kase
Letter from Dr. Karel Ease to Mrs. Fulles
1. Dr. Francis Kase has had the following relationship
with the Contral Intelligence Agency and National Committed
for a Free Europe:
He has never been an agent of CIA, but has been
used from time to time by 00/Contacts for translations
etc., and is now being paid between $150 and $200 per
month for subsistence by 09/0.
In December 1952, To Division referred this man to
the Mid-European Studies Center of the National Committee
for a Free Europe. Unfortunately, he did not fit into
their research pattern, but they think he is an extremely
capable man.
2. Unless the Director wishes to instruct NCFE to hire
Dr. Kase, I suggest Mrs. Dulles send the attached reply.
Attachment
:
Sungested reply
to reference. see
10/BrI:WPD-TWB/eh.
Orig & 1
2 cc
1 cc
1 cc.
-
-
->
Addressee.
- 1Ɔ/BrI
CIO
- RI
Woned THOMAS W BRADEN
THOMAS W. BRADEN -
Chief
International Organizations Division
chions
CURLY INFORMATION
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_191.jpeg ---
14-00000
?
.
SECRET
Security Information
4. Flock expressed certain misgivings with reference to the
character of RFB and VOA broadcasts, emphasising his conviction
that Western radio broadcasts should do nothing to compromise the
position of the Catholic Church in Poland, always taking as
guidance the attitude and statements of the Polish clerical loaders
themselves. He strongly urged that all possible stops be taken to
maintain the present volume of broadcasts into Poland as a means of
preserving hope and belief in the inevitability of Soviet communism's
collapsa,
Attachment
15!
Sherman D. Larb
Executive Secretariat, DC/P
SECRET
non
:
=
:
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_190.jpeg ---
14-00000
www.
7
1
SECRET
curity Information
14 October 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT
Vienna Conference with Ambassador Joseph Flack
1. On 2 September, representatives of RFE and VOA net with
Ambassador Joseph Flack and solicited his comments on reported
unrest in Foland, and the utility of KFC and VA Polish broadcasts.
2. with reference to internal disturbances and partisan.
activities, Flack stated that there have been "absolutely none"
in recent weeks, and added that earlier reports of unrest following
the June uprisings in East Germany were proved to have been without
foundation as a result of relatively unrestricted survey action
then taken by numerous representatives of N. S., British and French
diplomatic missions in Poland. He expressed his conviction that
there is no significant underground organization in Poland which
might be considered as an immediate asset by the West, and empha-
sized his belief that serious disturbances would not occur as long
as the present Soviet control mechanis retains its power and the
Soviet armies in Poland and East Germany go unchallenged. The
bitter lessons of World War II, particularly the abortive Warsaw
uprisings, and lack of confidence in the Polish emigration defin-
itely discourage active resistance. The Foles increasingly tend to
resent the action of the emigre leaders, regarding them essentially
as qymbols of failure, and, Flack feels, will undoubtedly develop
new leaders from within the country when the time comes for action.
'
3. Flack carefully distinguished resistance as an immediate
asset from resistance as a potential asset. He expressed the
belief that the Catholic Church still offers the strongest and the
best organised base of resistance in Poland as it is looked upon
as the only symbol of continuity and solidarity with the past. To
this he added his own appreciation for traditional Folish spirit
of independance and Christian orientation, and emphasized his
belief that Polish hatred of Russians and communion continues to
mount. Unfortunately, similar sentiment persists with reference to
Germany. Fear of German occupation or seisure of Polish territory
continues to play a prominent part in Polish thought and is
cleverly utilised by the Communist government in its propaganda
effort.
SECRET
Securay Inmuuton
:
!
002/4
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_183.jpeg ---
4-00000
--
75
byntegnike
M
ize in
..
512/92903
day:
1
B1.
431252
Epampal
s

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_192.jpeg ---
"
14-00000
i
25 September 1953
•MEMORANDUM FOR: ASSISTANT TO DCI
SUBJECT:
Attached Letter from William H. Smyth
With reference to the second paragraph of the attached
letter, the following information will answer the question:
Mr. Smyth's statement before the House Committee on
Foreign Relations was reprinted by the National
Committee for a Free Eurone. It appeared in "Progled",
a monthly mimeographed newsshoet, which is published in
Serb, Croat and Slovane, and contains statements oto.
made regarding Yugoslavia by prominent loaders, reprints
from articles on Yugoslavia etc. It has a lindtod
distribution (2-300) to Yugoslav emigres in this country,
and its purpose is to keep the Yugoslav emigration in
this country informed. It is indicated in the newssheet
that the statements reprinted therein do not reflect the
views or opinions of NCFE.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Attachment
CIO TWB/eh
Addresses (Mr. Long).
Orig
->
10/BrI
1 cc -
1 cc - CIO
1 cc - RI

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_193.jpeg ---
14-00000
a.
RESTRICTED
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICA
CONFID. TAL
SECRET
TOP AND BOTTOM)
UNCLASSIFIED
TO
-
2
-
S
FROM
->
1
2
DD/P
CIO
CIO
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY DD/P.
OFFICIAL ROUTING SHIP
5788
->
1028-K
APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
0.0
INITIALS
DATE
INITIALS
DATE
TWB
25 Sept
INFORMATION
(___) SIGNATURE
DIRECT REPLY
RETURN
EPARATI
PREPARATION OF REPLY
DISPATCH
FILE
CONCURRENCE ☐ RECOMMENDATION
Remarks: The attached reply was received from Mr.
Shepardson in response to my request for them to
study prospects for broadcasts to the Baltics.
Reference your letter of 30 July to C.D. Jackson.
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947 30-4
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
:
UNCLASSIFIED
fat POINTING OFFICE
1
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
rost
an
In creir
of
PReaction
ar indicated one preceding jelen
it would.
who in con
confund
to I feel that is
☑
>>
and
test it si
travagance
I could have
to he
reverses
lingber
1
authority.
By memorandum of 5 December 1952, Mr. Phenix refers
the fact that the trustees have given formal approval
to the establishment of a gymnasium and that his under-
standing of the reserve fund is that when the Board of
Directors of NCFE ask for the money, they recoive it at
once. He says that there appears to be some misunder-
standing of this procedure, pointing out that the locus
of misunderstanding "is in and around Frank W's office."
b.
The Turkish Broadcasting Station. Mr. Phenix intends
to raise this question as a basic policy matter, he having been
informed by us that while there is great enthusiasm for the project
and while the State Department has set January 15th as the date by
which VOA must either secure agreement from the Turkish Government
or withdraw itself from consideration, the basic policy question of
whether RFE then moves in has not been definitively settled.
Mr. Phenix would like to know definitely now whether, contingent
upon the failure of the Voice to gain entry to Turkey, NCFE can
proceed with the building of a Turkish station. This item, which
will probably be in the neighborhood of five million dollars, was
presented at the PRC meeting, at which time it was agreed it would
be considered as a separate project at a later date.
C. The Slansky Trial. Mr. Phenix is worried about the
statements in the Slansky trial indicating use of RFE by the United
We have told him
States Government to send operational messages.
that this secret arrangement was made with RFE by CIA men in the
field.
No approval of Headquarters was ever requested. Corrective
steps have been taken in the EE Division to insure that action which
may compromise operational facilities does not occur again without
[prior consultation with and approval of top authority of NCFE and
CIA.
Ertainly
Not
Turkick you
rall
Opsynoval
in anything
If the in
should he
tion - it
flatly demand.
the prin
d. Barbara Bowen. Mr. Phenix is concerned about a little
girl who works in the Munich office, who through some mischance of
several years standing is still on the roles of this Agency and draws
Phenix regards
retirement pay, although her salary is paid by NCFE.
this as a penetration though in fact Miss Bowen is a valued employee
of NCFE and has no contact with anyone from CIA. We are trying to
regularize the situation by affording her the opportunity of resign-
ing from the Agency or resigning from NCFE.
The
extension.
the
ing
whether we
help out
night with
the the existing
the
transcotting
to create something
enticity
how
Second Installation for Strasbourg University.
trustees of the Free University in Exile have voted to create a
German-speaking free university in exile, probably to be located in
the Saar. Phenix reports in his memorandum of December 5th that
DDCI has given Royal Tyler assurance regarding this
e.
mor
N.B.
Thew in
already
bein
Chiversity
much into
something
Let us not
in the Laar
think.
Marining
all
about what
in now
myp
Most

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_196.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Page 3
Mr. H: dvood
017-1
:
(1) Additional signal strength to Czechoslo-
vikin, Poland and thungary,
(11) Additional signal strength and programs
to Bulgaria and Romente, preferably from a transmitter
thstallation, and
Unless on desunte sum of money for one or all of
these operations is in sight,
NCRE does not recommend the extension of PE bro: der sting
to the three E: Itic states.
1
SECURITY INC.
Sincerely yours,
Samil Munch
!
!
..
2
:
:
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_194.jpeg ---
14-00000
311
SOCIET
SECUSIFY IN GR
September 14, 1953.
917-1
5788
;
Dear Mr. Hadwood:
17 short time ago the cusation was asked of us
whether RCFE would recommend the extension of RFE broad-
esting to the Baltic states. The Puestion was made the
subject of several perers ich were prepared for, and
circulated to, and there. fter discussed at three meetings
of the CPE policy committee.
Following these discussions, the NCFE position
is as follows:
Broadcasts of the RFE type (1.e. the type to Czechoslo-
vakia, Poland, and Hungary), directed at the three Baltic
countries, would be plainly advantageous to the United States
in terms of NCFE's objectives. There are even stronger argu-
ments for storting such brondensts at once than there were
for starting them two years cgo. However, now, is during the
1951 discussions, the problem arises whether such broadcasts
(Voices of Free Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) connot
without damage to diplomatic usage -- be handled by the Voice
of imbrich. The fact that Sovist occupation of the Baltic
nations has never been recognized by the Government of the
United States would appear to remove the restraints under
which the Voice of Americ. must operate where the local govern-
ment has an American diplom tic mission ccredited to it.
'
•
--
If the Voice of America in transmit Voices of Free
Estonia, Latvia, and wit`urnic, we would not want to compete
with them and would consider it preferable that they should do
the job with the whole prestige of the non-recognition policy
of the United States Government behind them.
certain that the Voice was not going to handle the task (wich
If we knew for
would be different one and in addition to what we believe to
be their present transmissions in the mitic languages) then
We would add the beltic nations to the list of unfinished busi-
ness to which RFE must direct its attention whenever sufficient
resources become available.
However, sufficient resources are far from being
Svailable at the present tire, and, urgent as are the needs
of the Baltic listening rudience in the present period of fer-
ment:tion of freedom throu hout the Satellite crea, our first
task must necessarily be to hold the audiences we already h; ve
in the face of the electronic wer that in being waged against
our transmissions by enery jmming. RFE's origin: 1 budget for
1953-54 was based on an order program to maint: in present gains
in the three main targets (Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary)
SECRET
SECURITY
!
::

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_198.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
SECRET
SECURITY IN TIC
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
September 17, 1953.
L
:
Miss McCrum:
I have a feeling that no one on our side is prepared to keep a firm hand
on the Jean Paul David trip.
David is himself a king-size free wheeler. Although be is unquestionably
one of the French "doers, as opposed to "talkers," in this field, he
"
is also quite a big-mouth and inclined to over-talk, over-promise and over-
indulge in cloak-and-dagger stage setting. If he hasn't got a guard, armed
to the teeth, with a beret and a half-burned cigarette glued to his underlip,
lurking outside the dining-room, he can't enjoy his meal.
The plot is complicated by the fact that as far as the U..S. is concerned
he has always been strictly covert. This time he arrives as strictly
"overt" so no one on our side will really know how to behave since
everyone will have to do and be the exact opposite of what they did and
were during David's last trip.
I would suggest that you show the attached to Abbott Washburn, George
Morgan, Tom Braden and/or Bill Durkee, and Joe Phillips (also this note)
and suggest that they work out who should consider himself responsible.
I personally hope Joe Phillips will be willing to take it on.
Incidentally, the American who handles David best is Helen Kirkpatrick,
She might conceivably be drafted as chaperone for this trip.
SECRET
SEQUITY
C.D. J.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_195.jpeg ---
14-00000
Pate 2
Mr. Hadwood ·
917-1
LECURITY IN SMATION
rea's
and to develop our present scenty exprbilities in Bulgaria,
and the lesser targets of Romanis, and Albania. The original
budget cut of shout 81,500,00, ne followed by a second cut
of $1,000,000, make it doubtful if RFW can even intin ful!
audience-reaching capabilities to all of its main target
let alone maintaining the scenty of pebilities to the other
t: rgets mentioned above. Indeed, the NOVE Board of Trustees.
111 prob bly vote on September 15th (1) not to expand Bul-
garish brodeusts, (11) to shorten. Hom nien brondents, and
(111) to elimin: to brodents to lie.
o
a
To enter the Etic rer, as real and not a token
target, would (I can informed by RF) cost additional sums of
money several times greater than the cuts that have recently
been rede. Much we would like to see this new reed.
up in what is generally regarded as "RFE style", either by YOA
or curselves, I see no hope of RFE's being able to undertake
the task until their budget willections can not only reach, but
substantially exceed, the mount needed to preserve existing
programs (egainst enemy interference) st their existing audience-
reaching level. And certainly if such budget additions
in
sight, it would be necessery for us to consider, longside the
Baltic plan, the relative desirability of:
(:) Strengthening still further the signal to the
three principal targets,
(b) Initting the often discussed plan for in-
stalling transmitters in Turkey or Greece for reaching Nomnis
and Bulgaria more effectively,
(e) Broadcasting to lbania as & more important
target than the Baltic states.
:
Conc usion:
Unless it is regrded as of paramount national in-
terest that RFE type broadersts be made to the Baltic states:
and
Unless it is clear that YOA is not in a position
to provide such programs; and
Unless it is clear that such development by RFE
is more important than:
:
CURITY INFORMATION
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_197.jpeg ---
14-00000
September 18, 1953
Memorandum for Messrs. Joseph B. Phillips
William Durkeo
Thomas Bradon
Goorge Morgan
Abbott Washburn
The attached memorandum is self-explanatory and
was written to me by Mr. Jackson while he was
away on vacation.
Could someone--perhaps Mr. Phillips--let us know
when it has been decided how David will be handlod?
Many thanks.
:
Attachments
Marie Mum
Marie McCrum
Socrotary to C. D. Jackson
.
'
!!.
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_199.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
COPY
--
SECRET
The following is from a dispatch written by Mr. William Tyler, dated
22 June 1953.
1. After a recent conversation with Jean Paul David, at which time he
outlined his activities and ideas in connection with the mission with which
he is charged by Georges Bidault, I received a letter from him.
2. It will be seen from this letter that David is most anxious that the
report which he will make on his survey should represent, without committing
any one country, a systhesis of the views and the resources of the Western
powers allied under NATO, in the broad field of propaganda and psychological
warfare designed to build support for Western defense policy and to promote
the achievement of the objectives of these policies.
3. It occurs to me that a difficulty which we have to face, and which we
are probably unique in having to face, is due to the organisational structure
within which we operate officially in the general field under discussion. In
a country like Italy, for example, it is possible for David to have exchanges
of views with high officials of the government and to feel reasonably sure
that even though such views are not to be taken as a commitment, they do in fact
represent the disposition of the government in question, or any government
likely to succeed it, toward these problems. In our case, however, it seems
to me that it will require careful preparation to determine with whom David
should consult and to work out a constructive position which will influence
his report and his recommendations in a direction which we approve.
4. It is particularly difficult for me to make specific recommendations,
since developments in Washington in the last few months are difficult to
keep up with from overseas. It would, therefore, be particularly helpful
to have headquarters' views at this stage on the following points, assuming
that David will go to the States in late September on the last leg of his survey:
a. With whom should he meet for basic discussions. (It occurs to
me that a suitable body, if still in existence, would be the Psychological
Operations Coordinating Committes.)
b. Within what limits at this time are we prepared to discuss the
problem of concerted action for the psychological strength of the North
Atlantic Community.
5. As headquarters is aware, C. D. Jackson knows David personally,
and it would perhaps be useful to arrange for conversations with him and
any group he might have in mind. It is true that the position of David
with regard to this Agency is anomalous, since the survey on which he is
engaged, far from relating to covert operations, is of the most official
SECURIT
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
!
1
SECRET
Security Information
31 December 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Plane
SUBJECT:
Background Material for Dr. Tyson's visit on Wednesday,
Jumuary 7th.
1. I would like the attached papers to call to your attention
the very good work that Dr. Tyson has done which is generally not known
here. His successful use of emigres in making a calm and factual pre-
sentation to the American public of conditions behind the Iron Curtain
is, in my opinion, the basis on which the Crusade for Freedom can be run
by the Heritage Foundation in the future.
2. Dr. Tyson shares our doubts about the Free University in
Exile. He agrees that the two principles upon which the University was
founded i
A.
that there were sufficient qualified Iron Curtain
escapees to justify institutionalizing their education; and
B. that by creating such an institution for escapees an
esprit de corps is öreated, together with a determination
on the part of the escapees to serve their homelands at
some future date
have not been proved.
3. All of the evidence to prove the validity of these principles
is certainly not in. The evidence at hand raises serious doubts, and is
as follovas
-
4
of
A. Of the current 208 students of the Free University, 37
are Yugoslave, and 12 were born in Western European countries.
(The high total ratio almost 25% of the student body
Yugoslav students, which is not a target country, together with
the non-satellite born students indicates an inability to recruit
the kinds of students the University was intended to train.) It
should also be noted that from the information available to us it
is not possible to determine what proportion of those listed as
born in target countries actually left them before Soviet domina-
tion. I have the impression, which is substantiated by the recruit
ing missions of Mr. Royal Tyler throughout Europe and even Turkey,
that suitable candidates are already extremely difficult to find.
It should be noted also that of the 64 outside scholarships given
to exiles in various European Universities, 16 are for Yugoslavs.
242
OLUT
Security }

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_200.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
-20
SECRET
LA
SECURITY GATION
kind possible. As headquarters has pointed out, his interests in his present
mission in reality pertain more to the State Department and NATO than
to us, and it seems to me that we should not be in the direct line of fire
except in the capacity of individual observera or participants in the
.conversations he will have. It would, therefore, seem to be all the more
important that we arrivo at a clear understanding among ourselves as to
how David's trip to the States will be organised and what is to be the
respective role of the component elements in the psychological effort with
regard to his survey.
/S/ WILLIAM TYLER
SEJUH
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_202.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
I want to emphasize that, in my mind, the reports and
suggestions gathered from all the specialists of all the ministries
of any particular country will not commit any country in any way.
I will name no one, compromise no Game, I want to gather the sum
of the ideas and resources of the Atlantic Community in this domain
and add a few personal idone which seem workable.
That is why, my dear Bill, I ask for your contribution as™ I
would like to carefully prepare this trip across the Atlantic.
forgive this long letter. Tell me vest you think of all this.
5/ Jean Paul David
Please
1
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_204.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
of the letter by NCFE will be undertaken on the guidance of the
United States mission of the United Nations. In the meantime,
HCFE will continue to work with the United States Mission to
the U.H. but the timing and use of the materials developed by
ECFE is to be determined by the United States Delegation.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief,
.
International Organisations Division
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_203.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
_4.6653
16 September 1953
MISHORANDUM. FOR: DIRECTOR, CENTRAL INTELLIGENER
SUBJECT:
Whitney Sheperdson Phone Call to Ken of Lesterday,
15 September, Concerning Forced Laber
1. The central facts in this business are as followss
NCFK had a letter sent to the President of the United States.
signed by various individual exiles expressing their gratification
to the United States Government for its "initiative in placing as an
item for the agenda of the 8th session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations the matter of 'Evidence of Existence of Forced Labor',
b. At this Division's direction the Department of State was
asked to prepare an answer to this letter for the President's signa-
ture which NCFE could publicly exploit in cooperation with the United
States Hission to the United Nations.
0. Late Friday afternoon this Division was informed by the De-
partment that no answer could be forthcoming as the U.H. Delegation
had decided not to push the forced labor matter at this time. NCFB
was informed to this effect the same afternoon and again on Monday by
this Division.
d. Because its letter was not being answered, NCYZ erroneously
assumed that the work it was doing on forced labor in cooperation.
dth the U.N. Delegation was to be of no avail and in fact that it
was the decided policy of the United States Government not to force
this issue at this or any other time.
The net effect of this matter is as follows |
(1) The Department of State will draft an answer for the
President's signature which will be transmitted to Secretary of
State, Dulles for his personal approval after consultation with
Ambassador Lodge. The approved answer will then be transmitted
to President Eisenhower for his signature. Public exploitation
;
ir
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_201.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
(TRANSLATION)
Translation of Latter from Jean-Paul David
ATTACHMENT #1
June 19, 1953
My dear Bill,
You know that
->>>
probably toward the end of September
to leave for the United States on a mission entrusted to
the Minister of Foreign Affaire.
-
-
I am
by
Mr. Bidault is concerned and justly so, about the problams
connected with the objectives of my survey; and my desire is to
produce a realistic report since I wish to avoid (you know my imy
of thinking) the traditional phraseology which generally takes
the place of action.
To date, in Italy, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Norway I
have successively conferred with the Prime Ministers, Ministere of
Foreign Affairs, or Defense, of the Interior, of Education. I have.
also sometimes mat with the Chiefs of Staff, and specialiste of
information and of psychological warfare.
To all of them, I have said,
:
"Mr. Bidault has requested me to make this survey and you have
before you the text of the French note which speaks for itself and
seams to require no further comment. I want to ask you to state,
in writing and without in any way committing your Government or your
particular services, what solutions seem reasonable. I wish to gather
all constructive ideas on this Entter. Your ideas will be useful,
perhaps, to other countries - even if you think them inapplicable in
your own. Then, I shall make a synthesis of the reports so assombled
adding thereto the thoughts of the French Minister of Foreign Affairs
in this respect. And, at the (NATO) 'Conference of the 14 at the end
of October, we shall have available a program on the basis of which
constructive action can be taken."
There, in telegraphic style, is my argument. I should add that
everywhere I found an excellent welcome, everyone accepted this method
and promised me substantial reports.
But, if in small or medium-size countries, I have encountered
no major difficulties, I have no idea of the way of thinking of your
compatriots on such matters. And this note is for no other reason
than to ask you to express your thoughts, in view of the excellent
advice you can give me.
-
.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 3 -
Mr. Phonix requests assurance that if Mr. Royal Tyler approaches
French authorities at the Sear to create such a university and is
granted permission, the Agency will supply the funds. E formal
request has been made and project of course has not been
budgeted.
f. Names of pensioned Army and Navy Officers. In compliance
with DD/P Notice No. 20-5 on 27 October, we have asked Mr. Phenix
to furnish the names of peraioned Army and Navy officers employed by
NCFE. Mr. Phenix is concerned about the legal ramifications of this
step, stating his fear that what this order implies for him is that
the monies he dispenses as Treasurer are government funds. He has
been assured by us that the purpose of the Agency-wide request is to
inventory those who are receiving Navy and Army pensions and serving
in proprietary organizations. He has also been assured that Army and
Navy pensioners in his organization will be exempt from any action
taken by the Agency on the problem of double pay. He is quite natur-
ally worried about it.
2. The Philosophy of Spencer Phenix. In arguing his case on
the above questions, and others, Phenix brings to his expport the
argument that he is not dispensing government funds. He says that
once government funds reach the 1848 Foundation they become private
funds. This is no mere self-delusion for the sake of maintaining a
position before his conscience. Because from this conviction he
proceeds to argue:
3.
a.
b.
C.
that the Agency cannot ask him to furnish such names
as suggested above, or lists and records of any kind.
that the Agency has no right to quary the decisions
of the staff and directors as to the expenditure of
funds once released by the Agency,
that the Agency has no right to intervene in NCFE
affairs or to issue guidance or instructions after
funds have been passed. Phenix modifies this point
by volunteering that the Directors are always glad
to receive atrice from friends such as DDCI.
Nevertheless,
Spencer Phenix is a good man at his job and I exierstand
--
frequently without
often untempered by good
the futility of arguing principle rather than cases.
the Phenix philosophy, arged as it is to the staff and directors
of NCFE, and stated to us whenever possible
relation to the facts under discussion
beginning to try
--
ren. X
souls of other good ren
S.P.
my
One
There is
neither time
now you
.
bere for
adlequal
it and
these points,
all that com
my win test if
Tholch
then crew
he is in
conflict @ with
mayaly
ctaff,
and other
and in
violation
exprera
the
all the
• th
in 1949.
humor, is
Aid
the ultimate
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_205.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
1
:
"
• MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECTI
Tree Se
4.5514.
8 September 1953
10
Spassing
The Director of Central Intelligence
British Foreign Office uneasiness concerning
the tone and content of EFE broadcasting to
the European satellites, and related matters.
1. Attached hereto e a memorandum of conversation prepared by
Tracy Barnes, who sat in on a conversation which took place on
4 September in my office with esra Rob Scott and Adam Watson of
the British Embassy. Tracy's memorandum covers the conversation
quite fully, but I should like to point out certain impressions and
conclusions of my own which believe to be worthy of your considera-
tion.
2. It was quite evident that Rob Scott, who, no you know is
the new Minister, and Watson had received sone fairly strong prodding
from Sir William Strang, and it was equally apparent that they were
not particularly well prepared as they were somewhat unbarrassed when
called unen for specifications -- unable t
unable as they were to produce
theat. Three other features of the conversation which struck me
rather forcibly were the following:
8.
•
The fact that they placed primary emphasis on
the absolute necesalty at the present time of keeping the
NS-IK copybook completely smirchless until such time as
there shall (may?) have been a high-level four-power noot-
ing, including the Sort, and until such time as it
shall have appeared clearly that the Soviet Governeent
is not prepared to make concessions and otherwise adept
a conciliatory approach This is a fairly evident
British line which they have teen peddling for some time
and I do not doubt that you heard something of it while
in London. I followed the letter and permitted to
order our conduct, the result would be that we would,
ourselves, adopt a total exeatness and light" program
for an indefinite period of time.
=
5.
The fact that the bassy representatives said
that they had no intention of speaking with the State le-
partment about any of this aroused some slight, suspicion
on ny part that they may have been deliberately bypassing
i
31.
1
SECRET
Security Invormation
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_206.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
Į
--
the Department in the hope of petting a better deal
directly with us. This is the more my impression,..
since if the Fritish "sweetness and light" line is to
be adopted and carried out in both letter and spirit
then the State Department had Letterbo get into
lire as well. Obviously the utterances of top State
Department officials, both here and abroad, and State
Department actions are much more important for the pur-
posts of this particular British exproach than are the
actious and utterances of our unofficial gray and black
media. I reported the substance of the conversation
to General Cabell who authorised me to bring it to the
attention of Doc Matthews, which I have done, and at
the same tine requested him to advise us if the Depart-
ment hears anything about Ulds from the British Embassy ].
--
which
13
had
c. Finally, Adam Watson dragged in by the tail some
questions about the so-called "Frendon Corps", and asked
me whether I could confirm that there had been a substan-
tial "heating up" of this old proposal within the past
month or six weeks. I replied that if this iden
was a very old one indeed in US Covernment eireles
reached any particular climax within the post month, 1
was not aware of it. I said that I had heard that the
State Depatment was considering asking the Noreign
Office what it thought about such a program. Pr. Watson
then replied that the State Department had, in fact, sub-
mitted this question to the Foreign Office and that the
Foreign Office had replied that it recommended most
strongly against any broaching of this subject at least
until after the derman elections, I thanked Mr. Watson
for bringing me up to date, and the point has not further
pursued.
Encl (1)
Memo for Record dtd.
3 September, sed by
C/PP: Conv. betw. Messrs
Wisner, Scott, Watson and
Barnes.
cc: C/PP
Isakann
FRANK WINER
Deputy Director (Plans)
detached 9/11 and
fit in PTTP's files
filed
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_207.jpeg ---
20
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
C/PP
REFERENCES:
a.
SECRET
Security informubor
11 September 1953
}
Recent conversation with members of the
FO staff of the British Embasey re RFE
broadcasts, etc.
Memo dtd Sept 8 from DD/? to DCI;
Subject: British Foreign Office uneasiness
concerning tone and content of PPE broad-
casting to the European satellites, and
related matters.
b.
Memo for Record dtd 8 September from
C/PP: Subject: Conv. betw. Mesers Wisner,
Scott, Watson and Parnes.
1. I am returning to you the original of the Reference a. memor-
andum for the file. Mr.Wisner asked whether you had shown your copy
of this memorandum to Mr. Braden he thinks that both Mr. Braden
and Mr.Durkee should see it.
--
2. Mr. Wisner asked me to tell you that his suspicions of
Mr. Watson's sheepishness were rather fully confirmed by a subsequent
conversation in which Mr. Watson admitted to Mr. Wisner quite frankly
that neither he nor Mr. Rob Scott had had very much stomach for
their mission that day. Mr. Watson rather doubted that we would
hear any more about this.
Attached:
Ref. a. memorandum.
SECRET
Segrity inform
BJ!!
:
5589

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_209.jpeg ---
14-00000
:.
:
4!
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
SUBJECT: RFE Coverage of ICFTU .
The following extracts of RFE's Daily Quidance Bulletins indicate the
general guidance around which more complete coverages are prepared for
broadoasting a
Daily Quidance 554, June 30, 1953, Page 2, Paragraph di
Concerning forthcoming conference of ICFTU, attention is called to
Christian Science Monitor of June 24, reprinted in today's Information
Dulletin, and to Report on America #13. "American Labor's Wide Hori-
sons" as published on June 26.
Daily Quidance 560, July 9, 1953, Page 4, Last two lines:
Remarks by George Meany, president of American Federation of Labor, be-
fore Stockholm meeting at International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions, in addition to expressing the philosophy of free workers toward
less developed areas, should have a special significance to our listeners.
at this stage of their struggle against Soviet colonialism. Meany de-
olared that freedom to colonial peoples and inhabitants of protectorates
was something democracies must take steps to insure as soon as possible.
The Federation (ICFTU) should see to it that workers in such territories
enjoyed trade-union organization liberty.
Daily Guidance 573, July 28, 1953, Page 3, Paragraph 0:
As far as East Germany is concerned, most significant news is vote by
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions to set up a fund "to
support insurgent unions in East Germany and other satellite countries
in their efforts to undermine communist control". George Mouny, Presi–
dent of AF of L, predicted that substantial sums would be made available
but "declined for obvious reasons" to say how they would be spent.
Meany's announcement would seem to be an event of major significance in
which all target areas should be equally interested.
i
-
-
Latest reports on East German purge roosive most of their meaning from
fact that a faction presently losing out is said to be composed of com-
munists who while not at all disloyal to the Kremlin -> - are not
Muscovites in the sense in which the victors are Muscovites. Chances are
that all communist functionaries who did not spend the last war inside
Russia are in danger of their jobs or, as the case may be, of their lives.
Human interest stories on recipients of food aid speak for themselves.
However, emphasis might well be on fact that recipients are either pri-
marily or exclusively unemployed workers and that communists dany
the existence of unemployment.
-
-
SECRET
Į
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_210.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Daily Quidance 590, August 20, 1953, Page 2, Paragraph fi
Note that ICFTU followed up on its promises reported here and created
special fund for support of Soviet Zone workaro.
:
".
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_208.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
pripation
25 August 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
RFF Coverage of ICFTU Developmenta
The attached extracts from RFB's Daily Guidance Bulletin are
evidence of the day to day coverage that RFE is giving to ICFTU
decisions. In addition we are setting up an arrangement whereby
RFF. will have continuing liaison with a member of the special
committee appointed by the ICFTU. Through this channel we hope
to supply PFS with documentary material on workers' conditions in
the satellites and to insure also that the line taken by RFF-
toward labor issues is not in conflict with the ICFTU position.
DCIO; CM/mf
Distribution:
Orig
-
1 cc -
Addressee via Jacobs
CIO
1 cc DCIO
->
1 cc - RI
CORD HEYER, JR.
Deputy Chief
International Organisations Division
SECRET
Security Information
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
Proculty
L
-3-527.
Ver Wisner
December 2, 1903
Dour Allen,
When we were talking on telephone dust wook you -
Reston that Alexander a possibly be interected in the
N.C.F.E. and that he might be worth considering as Pro
to succeed Min Miller. As you requested, I ve not
el nis nome to anyone as yet oni will not to so until an
further from you. As I underston it, you are going to be
talking to him some time this week and hope to ascertain
then whether he himself would have some intorest in this
Whenever you do get any further information on this plac
me know.
Keantino, a number of other names have been suggested and
we will give them careful smileration. Naturally we will
discues them with you before takin, uny definite action.
Rega
5

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_211.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGET
Security Information
19 August 1953.
KINORAS PUR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CESTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Food Program for Eastern Europe.
BUBJECT:
20 This proposed program supports a plan for limited food
distriction to the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe.
It is generally agreed that it is highly desirable honesty
to attempt food distribution through regular open channels, before.
utilizing any musual method such as balloons, even though it is
highly is the offers to distribute food will be accepted. It
is furke felt that no food program of any kind should be commenced
unless it is certain to culminate in actual deliveries.
2. Formal Offer: A group such as a Committee to Assist the
Peoples of instern Europe would be formed, which would in turn make
an offer of a definite amount of food to representatives of the
satellite governments of Eastern Euros. Eimultaneously, the Depart-
ment of rate would be requested to take up the food offer officially
with reprezentatives of the governments concerned.
CIA will arrange
The
for the onsition and sponsorship of the proposed committee.
food offer of the committee, taking note of the official statements
indicating text a food shortage exists in each of these countries,
would propose Ve establishment of an international commission to
supervise the distribution of food to the needy children of the areaB
involved. This food would come from .E. surplus stooks and through
contributions made by the sponsoring organizations.
3. Delivery of Balloons: In event of refusal by the satellite
regimes of the 19 offer, the committee might turn to the American
Heritage Foundation for help. The latter would be asked to utilise
its primary project, the Crusade for Freedon, both in raising public
funds and delivering food by balloons.
Cruseds for Freedom (NCFE)
A. Capabilities:
1. The Crusade can deliver 1,000,000 to 2,000,000 lbs.
of food by way of 200,000 to 100,000 balloons into Czechoslovakia,
SECKET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_212.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
5.
SEGRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
2 -
:
Hungary and Poland over a period of two to three weeks;
2. The Crusade can deliver 2,000,000 to 3,000,000 lbs.
of food in 400,000 to 600,000 balloons into Czechoslovakia,
Hungary and Poland over a period of five to six weeks;
:
Capabilities (1) and (2) above, are possible within the
time periode indicated only if U.. military facilities and
equipment for the necessary procurement and stand-by storage
of the hydrogen gas for the balloons is available. (20,000,000
cubic feet of hydrogen gas will fill 200,000 balloons sufficient
to lift 1,000,000 lbs.) If such storage facilities, etc. are not
available, the time periods must be revised for (1) and (2) above
to two months and three months respectively!
3. First balloon launching could commence within sixty
days of project authorizations.
4. Each food package, suspended to one balloon, would
contain five lbs. of staples. (sugar, fat, flour, coffee,
chocolate) Packages will be sealed and/or wrapped with poly-
ophelene.
B. Costs:
1. Costs of operation into Czechoslovakia, Hungary and
Poland would be approximately $1.15 per net pound of food delivered,
or a total figure of $1,166,000.00 for each 1,000,000 lbs. delivered.
2. Costs of operation into Albania, Bulgaria, Rumania
and Baltic areas would be greater, due to added technical factors,
necessity of shipboard launchings, etc. The unit cost figure
would be $1.55 per net pound delivered.
C. Operational Considerations:
1. If delivery of food into satellite areas is considered
feasibly, realistically sound, then entire operational effort must
be centered at launching delivery of food in the shortest period
of time. Counteraction to the impact of food deliveries will be
immediate and sustained to include "tampering" with food packages,
wholesale arrest, BW charges bolstered by staged photography.
2. Launching sites previously used by the Crusade for
Freedom for balloon operations into Czechoslovakia were located
along the Czech frontier between Chan and Hof. For launchings
into Poland and Hungary, sites in Berlin and in and around Graz,
Austria, respectively, would be the most operationally satisfactory.
SEGRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_215.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
+380
SECRET
M
10-3-2117
Sec
22 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations
I had a talk with Spencer Phenix about NCFE matters and
the following points were discussed.
(1) A Strategy Board to guide RFE. Spencer feels the need
for some higher level political guidance than RFE is getting from
their staff people and talked about getting together a board of people
like George Kennan, etc. I told Spencer that I thought it unlikely
that George would give very much time to this but might be willing
to give them an occasional idea or suggestion.
(2) Spencer asked me about the possibility of their finding
some job for Sam Reber. I told him to wait on this until I had time
to discuss it with FW.
(3) Spencer seemed disturbed that the allocation of one
million a month until our budget was passed would cramp their
operations. I told him that if they had particular difficulties to
let me know. He also asked what they should do about the proposed
allocation of $400,000 to help in the refugee situation. I told him I
was not familiar with this particular issue.
(4) He suggested that it would be well to have a meeting here
with some of the members of the Board and the Executive Committee
and suggested a date around the first week in August. I told him I
would do it if I had not already left the country by that time.
(5) Spencer is pleased with the better integration and
coordination of activities between their shop and this office.
cc: DD/P
ALLEN WIDULLES
bick
Director
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_216.jpeg ---
14-00000
::
:
STATES
12 January 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEFUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT: .
Proposed U.S. Aid for East German Refugees
1955
Executive t
3.6124
4
1. Last year you testified before the House Foreign Affairs
Committee in support of the U.S. "iron curtain escapees" care-
resettlement program, and during the course of testimony I under-
stand you stated that the program excluded aid to ethnic groups
such as Germans in accordance with PSB recommendations.
2. Mr. George Warren (UNA/Refugees) of the State Department
has proposed that $300,000 be made available from his program for
aid to selected East German refugee projects.
3. This proposal is being made as a gesture of aid to East
Germans and has the support of HICOG, of James Reber, and of
Representative Celler of New York, among other Congressmen. John
“Bross, CEZ, has no objection.
4. Frank Hand in my office is the liaison point; is following
this closely, and will keep up thoroughly informed but I thought,
in view of your testimony, you would want to know of the projected
policy switch.
Car 7
Tom
as Braden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
MATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_213.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
3 -
Concurrence of the proper Austrian, West German and British
representatives as to use of launching sites in their juris-
diction areas must be secured wil in advance through the
appropriate channels.
3. There is no marantee that the Adenauer government
will be favorably disposed towards this food delivery program,
even if it wins the September 6 elections.
4. For an opération which envisions the launching of
200,000 balloons (1,000,000 lbs. of food) over as short a period
as two to three weeks, a relatively large group of indigenous
personnel must be hired, trained (four or five days) and super-
Vised over a minimum five week period.
D. Paychological Considerationss
1. Most recent estimates indicates that the harvest
in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland will be fair to average
this year. Consequently, it would be a mistake to send food
into these areas simply to alleviate a "desperate shortage"
which might not in fact exist for workers in good standing.
Father, as a part of EFE's accompanying program exploitation,
the population would be urged to conserve the packages as "iron
retions" or "atrike ratione" against the day when they might not
otherwise be able to afford absentedian or loss of veges for
other reasons.
2. One of the gravest risks to any food delivery
program of this kind, especially should its launching interval
be in accase of two weeks, is the systematic poisoning of food
parcels by the communists. The only really effective way of
safe guarding against this is by anticipating it and pre-con-
itioning the people, via, against contaminated efforts.
3. During the time when, and at the places where the
food is packaged, the Crusade should arrange for supervision of
Đich packaging by acceptable humanitarian/religious international
☑oups, such as the Quakers or the Red Cross, in order to neutralise
Ex charges and augment the Lonafides of the committees and Crusade
for Freedom.
4. The initial private and official offers of food to
the satellite areas must be accompanied with certain conditions
ensuring guarantees of delivery, in order to avoid communist
acceptance of a food offer as such, which would place us
in the awkward position of having to subsequently request.
guarantees for proper distribution and delivery.
SEOPET
Securit
1
L
T

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_218.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
SECRET
Security Information
5. We will maintain close coordination on all matters relating
to Radio Liberation broadcasts to the occupation troops and solicit
your comments and suggestions on our broadcasts to the USSR proper
and on all other matters.
2 -
Addressee
1 - C/10
ANDRE YEDIGAROFF
AC/LR/1
Security information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_214.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
i
10/BrI: HSD/ah
Orig - DD/P
2 cc - 10/Bri
1 cc
-
CIO
5. Dre of FE "running attack" during balloon
operation is well illustrated by the following -- 'Czech
workers would have to work t.t pourn to earn enough money
to buy me average pound of food parcels contents, whereas
the American worker could earn the 1.15 over net lb.
dolivared in 1.2 hours.'
D. Conclusions:
1.
The operation is large and the maultant psychological
gains and lasses, depending on many miables, could be extensive,
Heedless to say, the operation should not be undertaken, even in
part, as a 'gesture' or on a 'guable'.
2. Balloons are not the most economical means of deliver-
ing food, in paint of fact, the movement of items by balloon is at
least twice an expensive as any regular means. However, to date,
balloons are by far the most feasible way of diffusing a relatively
large amount of food containers into an otherwise denied area.
3. Planning of the oneration in all its phase should
include the rector of HPZ, in order to ensure a well coordinated
political warfare program,
E.
Recommendations:
It is requested that should authority be given to proceed
on this balloon-borne food program, cuch authorization be contingent
on the following recommendations:
1. That the commencement of the balloon Launching be
generally planned for the and of this year..
2. That no more than 400,000 balloons be released
(2,000,000 lbs. of food) at a cost of approximately #2,332,000.
than
3. That the balloon launching phase of the food delivery
operation into Csechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, not exceed ten
full consecutive days from its date of commencement.
4. That $50,000 be made available immediately for pre-
paratory work.
5. That food deliveries into Albania, Bulgaria, Rumania
and the Baltics not be considered until after the primary operation
into Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland has proved successful.
1 CC -
ce - RI
THOMAS W. BRADEH
Chief
International Organizations Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_217.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
SPRET
☐
Security Information
22 July 1953
EXCRANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations/Branch 1
SUBJECT:
Coordination or Radio Free Europe and Radio Literation
1. As both you and Mr. Slonich agreed in your informal coaver-
sation of yesterday, the present explosive situation in the satellite
periphery and the interia Psychological Strategy Boarú gutüance on
its exploitation necessitate closer cooperation between our respec-
tive facilities and branches. I want to thank you for offering to
make it possible for us to gain further access to HCFB libraries
and open sources and for your offering us further technical assis-
tance. I agree that it would be desirable to exchange a branch of-
ficer so that we may have a better understanding of our respective.
assets and problems. ER/1 will provide one of your associates with
a desk and complete access to our files at any time.
2.
It may be well for us to discuss how we can best take ad-
vantage of further demonstrations and riots in the satellito areas.
Should there be an uprising in Poland, for example, it may be desir-
able for RFE to place broadcasting time at the disposal of Radio
Liberation so that the latter may address concentrated and repeated
appeals to the Red Army not to fire on Polish workers and peasants,
not to interfere in the Polish struggle for freedom, and to consider
the Polish people as the allies of the Soviet people in their common
struggle against Communism. It was this line that Radio Liberation
followed during the East German uprisings. In the event of riots
in Czechoslovakia where the Red Army is not present in force and
where the satellite security forces may be unable to keep order,
close cooperation will be even word desirable.
3. Consideration could be given to having RFE allot Radio
Liberation regular time on its broadcants to Poland and bulgaria
where there are large concentrations of Soviet troops so that Radio
Liberation can further build up the idea of a free, soviet anti-
Communist moral and political authority and to express the solidar-
ity of the Soviet peoples with the oppressed countries of Central
and Eastern Europe. Radio Liberation could also allot regular tim
on its transmitters so that spokesmen of free Czechoslovakia and
Poland could address the Soviet troops.
4. It will, of course, be necessary to discuss the divergent
approaches of the two stations. Because of its sponsorship, its
identity and its mission, Rallo Liberation cannot treat the Sovie
oppression of the Central and East European peoples in terms of
nationalist domination and exploitation. Radio Liberation always
distinguishes between the people on the one hand and the Party
and Police on the other, and it is our policy to identify the Red
Army with the people. Se

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_22.jpeg ---
.14-00000
December 1, 1952
ber Hedwood,
The enclosed document be of interent to you and
are sent to you for information.
1152
Sincerely yours,
Whiting
Stestton
!
!
1
!
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_219.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET
22 1963
MEMORANDUM POR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION
ATTENTIONI
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Branch One
General Pavle Gruya Pavlovic (201 14578)
-
Mamorandum. from Deputy for Policy Coordination, BM
to IU, dated 16 July 1952, Subject as above
i
1. Although not initially responsible for recommending that
the NCFN subsidize (eneral Pavle Pavlovic, in referenced memorandum
SE Division endorsed the continuation of payments by the NCFE to
Subject on the basis of his ability to aid in research work being
done for CIA at the Pentagon, as well as of hio need no a meri-
torious exile. We have recently been advised by ios Stern of
your office that the NCFE wishes to discontinue this payment since
Subject does not participate directly in the NCFE's motivitios..
No have been further advised that if S3 Division wishes General
Pavlovic to receive a regular income from the NCFN, SN must provide
the necessary funds.
2. It is believed that termination of the subsidy by the HOPE
will result in real personal hardship to the General, who, at the
age of seventy, has no other known source of income. S3 Division,
however, is not in a position to provide the necessary funds,
since this would necessitate the initiation of what would soson-
tially be a charity project, falling more properly within the
purview of 10/Branch One. Neither can this Division justify
continuation of payments on the basis of work performed for SE,
since he has been working primarily for the Department of the Army
during the past year. The arrangements for his work at the Penta-
gon are such, however, that CIA can place research requirements
on General Pavlovic whenever desirable.
3. In reviewing the anse this year, we have accertained
from the Department of the Army that Subject has worked diligently
and contributed materially to the work of his office. He has
been particularly commended for his adaptability and readiness
to work, which have shown themselves in his efforts to learn
English and typing.
÷
SECRET
4.
It is the opinion

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_220.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET
4.
It is the opinion of SE Division that the NOFE decision
to terminate payments to General Pavlovio should be consistent with
its polioles vis-a-via other Yugoslav emigros, many of whom receive
regular stipenda sololy on the basis of "pres:iga". General
Pavlovio's actual contribution to the efforts of the U.S. Government,
if not of CIA or the HUFE directly, should be taken into considera-
tion in addition to his very real need before halting payments to
him.
Ve would appreciate your informing us as to the final
disposition of this case,
CHRISTIAN M. FRHER
Acting Chief, 53
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_221.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
22 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (FLAIRS)
SUBJECT:
Message from Whitney Shepardson
4805"
7/23
F GWsuw
but decided
to take no
action.
By
1. Whitney Shepardson cabled the following to his office with
the request that they immediately give it to C. D. Jackson. This
information and message was given to us today by Spencer Phenix.
"Report this morning Mrs. Hilde Benjain new East German
Justice Minister rescinded right to strike granted Juno 11
by predecessor.
Seems appropriate your boss Tatraday press conference or
perhaps more formally sum up recent Russian inspired communiɛt
actions behind curtain; in Czechoslovakia savings wiped out,
future bleak, families, children bankrupt. In east Germany
recision of elementury right of labor to strike is again denied
‘and will be ruthlessly crushed by force. Satellite, states long
deprived of their food and goods by most vicious practices of
colonialism known for two centuries. This is no paradise for
workers, this is hell. In the United States this capitalist
society so often denounced by Soviet propaganda lines, the
savings of the workers are protected in law and in fact, and
the right to strike is protected in law and in fact also.
Aftor almost two hundred years of its national existance there
can not be found in the US one trace of the colonial practices
which characterise Soviet rule over its satellite colonies.
Condon asks that if such theme is used "give our boys a
break so they can prepare and push home with background and
variation."
¡
I
(signed) THOMAS W BRADEN
THOMAS W. SPALIN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECURITY INFORMATIO
!
¡
1
17

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_223.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
:
T
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
☺
July 21, 1953
" PROSPERO "
Proliminary Report
The purpose of this operation was to exploit the
present critical circumstances in the Communist empire.
and in Czechoslovakia in particular by bringing to the
people of that country tangible evidence of the Wost's
interest in and support for their realatano» against
the regime. There follows a brief summary of the sallont
facts about the operation:
5402 rubber balloons and 1212 plastic balloons
were launched from the primary site in Ellenfeld,
a small Gorman village on the Czechoslovak
frontier and from the secondary site in Sohönbee,
some 40 miles to the south.
2. These carried a not total (after wastage) of
approximately 10,000,000 messages of three types:
3.
Ho
0.
A likeness of the new 1-crown note issued
by the Czechoslovak regime following the
recent currency reform. The text of this
note is attached as Appendix Ap
A roplion of the new 25-holler coin,
bearing the words "All our people for
-
freedom All the free world for our people",
The words "Free Europe" and the omblem of
the Freedom Full appeared in the center of
the coin.
A leaflet bearing photographs of the Eust
Berlin demonstrations on one side and a
text describing recent events in East
Germany and the Soviet Union including
the Beria purge) on the other. Copies of
this message are attached as Appendix B.
The target areas for the operation were:
(a) the industrial and mining districts of
northwest Bohemia; (b) the capitol of Prague
and the heavily populated area north of
Prague; (c) the city and environs of Pilsen;
(d) the Ostrava region.
(See display map.).
!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_222.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
21 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FORT DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Meeting with PBB :
1. I understand that two of the matters that have como up before
your PSD luncheon are:
a. C. D. Jackson's proposal to send food to East Germany
via balloon.
b.
C. D. Jackson's proposal for a monument memorial to be
put up near the Brandenburg Gats. I would like to comment on
these two proposals for what use it may be to you.
2. It seems to me food shipment via balloon is a meaningless
gesture. It will not do any positive good because it can't get enough
food into East Germany to make any differorce. Thus a negative result
is fostered; it looks and appears to be paychological warfare of a
rather obvious kind. The food offers by the U. 8. Jovernmont and
those by the ICFTU were, as the London Tims pointed out last Monday,
psychological victories, but the Russians are now moving food into
Germany in far greater quantities than we can do via balloon. In
addition, there are obvious dangers from the standpoint of a BW play-
back as Mr. Misner suggested. It would be much easier and much more
effective for the Russians to use the theme on balloon shipmento
than on any quantities of food that the Government or the ICFTU are
actually able to get behind the Iron Curtain. In sum, balloons aro
a trick and food doesn't lend itself to tricks.
"
3. I think the monument idea is a respectable one but not an
the level that the PSB people seem to want to play it. They have in
mind a world campaign to be conducted in all countries, particularly
in this one and in South America with a distinguished body of citisens
to lead the campaign here. I do not think the memorial idea is big
anough for that (the best memorial so far erected was Berlin's ownI
decision to change the name of the Unterlindan to Strasse June 17).
think the manorial idea ought to be left to the Germans. He can
delicately suggest it and see that it is followed up with any support
necessary in this country through already existing organizations such as
NCFE or the Crusade for Freedom if this is necessary. These should play
a minor role.
CIO:TWB/ch
. Orig
->
Addressee
1 cc
1
-
GIO
CC - H.
T
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_224.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
2.
4. The oporation took place between 0800 Monday,
July 13, 1953 and 2400, Friday, July 17,
Balloons were in the air 15 working days after
conception of the idea, and 3 working days after
final approval. The third (Berlin-Feria)
mesango was sent to the printer on Saturday; on
Monday 2,000,000 copies were at the site and on
the way to their destination.
5.
6.
7
8.
A crew of 22 workmen was transported from Munich
to the alto, Including guards,
Including guards, drivers, and
supervisory personnel, the total payroll for the
oporation was approximately 40. The crew was
billeted in a small hotel in the nearby village
of Tiraohenreuth and was fed in a Gasthof at the
alte, Working time totalled approximately 3000
man houra, The operation entailed the use of
7058 cubic meters of hydrogen, representing 17900
lbs. of lift. The weight of the hydrogen
cylinders was 102 tons.
The rubber balloons carried an average payload
of 2 lbs. and burst at an altitude of from 30,000
to 40,000 ft. They rose in the air at a rate of
100 to 500 ft. por minuto. The total elapsed
time from the leaflets' point of departure to
arrival on the ground ranged from 2 to 5 hours.
The plaatio balloons carried a payload of from
1/10th to 4/10ths of a pound, travelled at an
altitudo of 30,000 ft., and penetrated from 60
to 300 miles, depending on the target desired,
The plastic balloons do not burst but descend
to the ground at a point determined by the amount
of gas and weight of payload. At the peak of the
operation well over one million: messages were in
the air at the same time.
The wind speed averaged 40 miles per hour and
ranged from 230° (blowing into Northern Bohemia)
to 270° (blowing towards Prague and Ostrava).
Pilsen wus bracketed from both launching sites.
Meteorological data was obtained from the Neubiborg
air baso and confirmed by radar facilities
located 7 kilometers from the sito. These
facilities and the personnel necessary to man them
were obtained from the U. S. Almy, They were
able to track target balloons deep into the
country. The radar units were also able to detect
Czechoslovak air activity and to establish that
the other aids was also using radar, presumably.
in connection with the balloons/6
Border activity was intensified during the period
of operations, During 5 trips to the frontier
(which was within sight of the launching location),
it was observed that officers had replaced enlisted
men on border patrols. On several occasions
attempts were made by ground forces to shoot down

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_226.jpeg ---
14-00000
4,
b.
0°
do
13.
Commentarion over Radio Mosecin Russian
and Polish and over Radio Warsaw,
Articles in the Romanian and Hungarian
press.
An article in Moscow Pravda.
In accordance with previous plans, Weatorn
publicity about the operation was discouraged.
Conclusions
The limited purpose of "Prospero" has, so far as we know,
been substantially achieved. However, it must be acknowledged
that an operation of this kind is both strongly provocative
and (because of its tangible form) susouptible to dangers not
risked by radio, There is the further complication that it is
launched from German soil and could conseivably cause injury to
RFE's position in Germany. All of these factors must be
carefully weighed in considering any future action of this sort.
Further, this must be classified as a "crash action", as
evidenced by the time elapsed between conception and termination.
Crash actions are good once or twice, but are not to be
recommended as a habit either from the point of view of cost or,
even more important, in cognizance of the utter necessity of
careful and thorough preparation of the best possible message.
On the positive side, this can be stated:
1.
The message was timely, worth saying, and closely
integrated with RFE policy.
2.
Enemy reaction was immediate and sorely hurt.
3.
Internal conditions and the world Communist
situation suggest that the action was taken at
an apt moment.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_225.jpeg ---
14-00000
go
3.
the balloons, although only two hits were observed
by bordor police.
On Wednesday, July 15, at 1400 hours, two
Migs flew along the frontier over the site and were
clearly observed by the working party. Subsequently
that afternoon the theodolite was moved to a hilltop
point (from which, incidentally, the hills around
Pilsen could be discerned) and Miga attempting to
shoot down ballconswwere viewed by members of the
party as well as by the German border patrol. As
many as 7 Migs were observed at one time. Three hits
were witnessed, two of which appeared to cause the
balloons to explode and one of which simply caused
the balloon to disappear. On Wednesday night
additional planes were reported by border police.
Searchlights were also seen. On Thursday, 5
Messersmiths 109Fs replaced the Migs and succeeded
in destroying three balloons. No air action was
observed on Friday, although at 1000 hours a jet
vapor trail materialized directly above the
Launching site and was headed into Czechoslovakia.
However, it was impossible to see the aircraft or
to say for certain that this was a border violation.
On the last night of operations (Thursday) a
procession of 80 plastic balloons with candle-lanterns
was launched. Since the night was perfectly clear,
the "torchlight parade" could be easily observed
the lights looked like stars marching quietly acress
the sky. No airoraft were seen.
-
10. The total cost of both the original operation and
the supplementary Sorlin-Beria message is estimated
at less than $25,000, or a unit cost of 1/5th of a
cent per message sent. A substantial portion of
this represents transportation and other non-recurrent
expenses which would not be involved in a sustained
operation.
11. Note must be made of the invaluable technical and
operational assistance provided by the two General
Mills personnel, Mr. C. B. Moore and Mr. Fletcher
Bartholomew, who were present on the trip. It
should also be mentioned that the help of RFE
personnel was exceedingly valuable.
12. As of the date of this report, regime reaction
includes:
Rude Pravo editorial read over Radio Pragua
on July 18. (Appendix C), plus supplementary
articles in Svobodno Slovo and Khada Front.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_228.jpeg ---
14-00000
ASE ON LEAFLET
:
CZECHS AND SLOVAKS! HEAR THE MESSAGE, WHICH COMES TO YOU TODAY
FROM THE FREE WORLD!
THE SOVIET UNION IS GETTING WEAKER!
THE PEOPLES OF THE CAFTIVE COUNTRIES ARE GROWING STRONGER!
The Soviet Union is getting weaker. The struggle for Stalin's
heritage, shakes the entire Soviet empire and fear creeps
through the Kremlin. who will fall with Beria and who will
full after Beria? How many millions will fall victims to the
new purge which is now going to begin - the biggest purge
which the Soviet Union has ever known?
will fall in the Soviet Union and how many
How many victims
in the occupied countries? Who will fall with Berla in
Proque and who will be reaged down by his fall in Bratislava?
Who will be the new Slansky and who the new Clementis? And
when the purge spreads and broadens, down from the Politbureau.
to the lands and districts, to the offices and the factories
how many functionaries will safely survive?.
-
Only those will survive who detach themselves from the sinking
Communist boat in time. Only those who join the people and
help the people's strusses against the oppressors.
The Soviets have trapped themselves. in a blind alley. If
the Moscow boot weighs even heavier on the necks of the
oppressed people and if Moscow's demande upon the frightened.
puppet governments become more pressing, the resistence of
the people will only
for the people will not return
Into submission. If the Communist regimes, in order to
appease the wrath of the people, try to bribe their subjects
by promising concessions as in Hungary and in Eastern
they will get nowhere: for the people will no
longer be deceived by phony concessions.
Germany
-
-
The people are growing stronger. The first flames of revolt
have flared out in Cuechoslovakia and in Eastern Germany.
From Pilsen, from Moravska Ostrava, from Oslavany, from Berlin,
Dresden and Magdeburg the echo of this revolt has roared
throughout the world and deeply shaken the entire Soviet realm:
the people showed their strength.
The Communist regimes resized the menace and became afraid.
They started apologising. They started self-criticising.
They started giving promises.. In Germany the anti-labor de-
crees had to be revoked. In Czechoslovakia the frightened
Government was forced to desist from applying the penal laws
concerning absenteeism. In Moscow, under the influence of
the news of the peoples Revolt in Czechoslovakia and Germany,
the internal struggle sharper. Beria and his all-
powerful police fell as victims. Your resistance has helped
Į
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_227.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
4.
5.
Technically, with radar help it was provod
that balloons could be launched carrying
relatively heavy payloads on en, assembly lino
basis with a high degree of target accuracy.
This was not proviously known.
Aside from the impact of the messages, the
very fact that the West was interoated enough
to go to the trouble and expense of ponotrating
the Iron Curtain by a moans which the regime is
powerless to prevent by Mign or bullets -
cannot be lost upon the captive peoples.
--
9. S. Walkor, Jr.
f
5.
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_229.jpeg ---
14-00000
..
7
to alter the course of history: new forces rade their
appearance on the battlefield, the people won their first
major victory in their fight with the regime.
CZECHS AND SLOVAKS!
The more your oppressors are shaken by uncertainty, the
greater in the certainty of your victory. The Yogime 13
afraid of you, it known that power is fundamentally on
your aide. This is the time when people's unity, common
agreement, and unity of purpose are capable of winning
concessions. Your battlefield of labor is in the factorles
and in the fields. On this battlefield
On this battlefield of labor you have
the advantage of numbers. On this battlefield you cannot
be vanquished. You will not be content with bribes, you
will ask more and more from the exploiters. se do not
presume to give you orders nor to give you advice. Ycu
and your new leaders who are being born in the struggle.
know best how and where to strike. But we want you to
know that you are not alone: Among the masage of people
behind the Iron Curtain the fire of revolt is amouldering
and its sparks are flying from country to country. Every-
where in the free world your friends are with you. Their
help will grow as your determination grows.
FREE EUROPE!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_230.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
MESSAGE ON BANKNOTE
On one side:
Czechoslovaka, know this:
The regime is weaker than you have dared to think!
Power lies with the people and the people stand opposed.
With unity and courage, organize your strength: Down
with the collective! Insist on workers' rights!
demand concessions; tomorrow freedom!
On other side:
-
-
Today
Men call this the hunger crown gift of the Soviet
Union. It is the symbol of regime desperation, of
fave-year failure: It is a challenge to fight, to meet
weakness with strength, to resist as you know best.
The other captive peoples arc uniting and will join you
in your struggle.
The free world is with you!
All power to the people!
-
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
CO: Y
October 31, 1952
The Honorable Joseph C. Grew
2840 Foodland Drive, N.W.
Washington 8, D. C.
Dear Mr. Grew:
Atteched herewith you will find a most interesting surtary of the
methods tht have been adopted by the USSR to attract the minds of youth in
the satellite states.
It has long been known that some such program was being followed, cab
it is only recently that detein has become available.
In contrast to these methods, efforts expended in this country to teach
our young people the resi merning of freedom as represented by western democracy
are Testis. It is almost safe to state that we have been relying solely on en
innate, sentimental aversion to "communism", because no intelligent or systematic
mesna have as yet been organised that will cpture the minds of the young people
of the United States in the some fervent manner that the communist ideology has
taken hold of Russian youth.
For a little more tarn a year, in connection with the reorganization of
the ressur activities of the Division of Intellectual Cooperation we have been
attempting to enlist the neup of American intellectuaic not the intellfmcia.
There is a difference.
-
-
From the very beginning I have been amazed to discover the dearth of people
who are familiar with that section of Eur pe which engages NCFE interest the
beit of countries extending row, the Baltic to the Aegern. I has curious rind
out why there were so l'ew upon whom we could drew for ne_p, so I started on inquiry.
The resis are now being compated.
must remember that the teaching of history or of government in America
hu never been emphasized to the same degree that it has in Europe. The curricula
of the secondary schools in that p rt of the world cover those subjects mich more
part
comprehensively than is the case with us. It was difficult for me to appreciate
this at first, but our inquiry has verified it without any doubt. In practionaly
all European countries now on either side of the Iron Curtain it has long been
trsation to emphasize instruction in history, because the tides of war and
change have ebbed and flowed scres: their unds for many centuries. We here
Deep Isc_sted and in most respects iree from foreign influences as we navo
develop our democratic processe:. Toury American foreign policy faces reve

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_231.jpeg ---
14-00000
RPE LO 7-24-53
CAESAR INFO WALKER FY MICHIE
OUR VIENNA BUREAU YESTERDAY REPORTED POLLOWING BALLOON REACTION:
QUOTE SEVEN MEH FROM PARDUBICE SAID THAT ALL LAST WIEK PEOPLE
WERE JUMPING LIKE PROGS TO CATCH THE LEAFLETS AS THEY CAME DOWN.
MANY PEOPLE WORE THE COINS ARCUND THEIR NECKS. MANY SOLDIERS
WERE CHECKED OUT FROM THEIR ARMY UNITS TO COLLECT THE LEAFLETS.
SAME REFUGEES SAID ALSO THAT IN PILSFH MIG PLANES TOOK OFF VERY
HOUR FROM THE AIRPORT TO SHOOT DOVAL THE BALLOONS. THERE WERE
NO REPEAT NO LEAFLETS AND NO REPEAT 50 BALLOONS IN THE BUDEJOVICE
AREA IT WAS REPORTED. NEVERTHELESS ALL THE GENDARMERIE INTERVIEWED
THE POPULATION TO SEE IF THEY HAD SONPHON OBTAINED AMY. ALSO THE
POSTMEN HAD ORDERS PROM THE GENDARMERIE TO ASK EVERYBODY ALONG
THEIR POSTAL ROUTES IF THEY HAD ANY LEAFLETS.
UNQUOTE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_232.jpeg ---
:
i
14-00000
;
TO CAESAR FOR W/ EN MICHIN
RADIO WARSAW JULY 20 0700 HOURS QUO27 BALLOON ACTION.
AMERICAN
IMPERIALISTS HAVE LATELY LAUNCHED IN WESTERICH GERMANY A CAMPAION
-
AGAINST CEFCHOSLOVAKIA THE DAILY RUDE PRAVO STATED IN AN ARTICLE
ENTITLED QUOTE A CAMPAIGN CONDEMNED TO FIASCO UNQUOTE. FROM AUSTRIA
SMALL BALLOONS CONTAINING DENOUNCING LEAFLETS HAVE BEEN LAUNCHED IN
THE DIRECTION OF CZECHOSLOVAKIA. THE ACTION AS ANNOUNCED BY THE
MUNICH SLANDER-STATION FREE EUROPE
4.
WAS LED BY AMERICAN EXPERTS
WHO CAME TO WESTERN GERMANY FOR THAT INTENTION.
IT IS A FACT SAYS
RUDE PRAVO THAT FALLOON EXPERTS HAVE NOT SPAICED THE LEAFLETS.
DURING TWO DAYS TIME CZECHOSLOVAK CITIZENS HAVE BROUGHT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF LEAFLETE TO SECURITY AUTHORITIES AND NATIONAL COMMITTEES.
CZECHOSLOVAK WORKING MASSES ARE DEEPLY INDIGNANT AT THIS DISHONEST
PROVOCATION OF WARMONGERS UNQUOTE.
RADIO WARSAW JULY 22 0700 HOURS QUOTED THE NOTE BENT BY THE CZECHOW
SLOVAK GOVERNMENT TO THE AMERICAN EMBASSY. THE CZECHOSLOVAK GOVERN-
MENT SENT A NOTE TO THE MAERICAN EMBASSY IN PRAGUE IN WHICH IT
PROTESTS VIOLENTLY AGAINST SPREADING ON CZECHOSLOVAK TERRITORY SOME
LEAFLETS, CALLING FOR ANTI-STATE ACTIVITY. THE NOTE STRESSED THAT
THE PROVOCATIONS HAVE BEEN PREPARED AND CARRIED OUT BY AMERICAN
CITIZENS WHO ARE STAYING IN THE AMERICAN OCCUPATION ZONE IN WESTERN
GERMANY UNQUOTE
:
1
:
J

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_233.jpeg ---
[4-00000
&
EX-CH AND PUBLICATIONS SERV (08
only 20, 195
T
following coort in one o
o the first full attocks on the
recent toon ration" in Czechoslovakia. The text was ad
Over Radio Prague on July 18, 1955:
'
•
4
-
3
We are going to read to you now an article from today's Ruce Pravo.
The article is called. "An Action Doomed to Paljure" The to
the peats policy of the Soviet Union and of all the cou of
the cams of peace, the conviction that a war can be prevented grow
5% al
gee omon the people 1 through the world. all this
1
evocation creates a meat concern with those for whon what consti
tuce a pource of inmensurable gana and of Juxi/ious lie.
The Tore the warmongers do their jest to put obrtsolen St the way
whah Leads towards the lessening of international tension In
Polen the part of the provadaseur and saboteur of the pace effort
wriven to Synemer Rhec. In Geenany site we use, recruited
fron the parks of Nazi war cminals in the desocratic sector of
Berlin as well as in some other parts of the German berberatio
Roublic, And after the failure this much heralded day, there
comes the hypocritical and demagogical offer to help to
tion of the DUR, which was made for obvious orcoaganda recup which,
in fact, was admitted by the Western bourgeois prean.
popula-
Into this chain of provocations which are aimed against the
strengthening of peace there also belongs the American peraganda
action which was started in the last days in Western Gey
di
Brainst Czechoslovakia. In a similer way in which two years ago
the 111-fumed "Criers for Freedom" were doing it today ain
balloon dispersing inflamatory, leaflets over ou. trisor Are.
being sent from the Pavarian sidd.
The Munich transmitter Free Europe, financed by or and lar
"institutions" speak boabostically of the propartada balloon
action which, all
y the bigrecs action of this kid which
22
ever hun been attempted and for the dirtction of which there cam
to Western Germany specialists from America.
de
-
He can indeed cerify that the balloons apesta 14 now spare
the leaflets in the first two days tena and hundreds of ousanda
of those leaflets are with our police and our national committee:
where they are being brought by our citizens after having be
discovered. The farter Hajek Prom Doubravaton, diaries o o' Cecky
Brod, brought an entire parce of flots which came down in one
31:30. Josef Korinak from Zates brought an entix = balloon which
fall down. The leaflets are being brought by the B of the
Vladimir Lenin Works as well as other factories, by farmers,
railwayren and children. Yet even if the balloon: action was not
only four times bigger as Free Europe says
but hundred: times
bigger than the Crush acier of 1951, it bring to its
initiators the very opposic of what they had in mind.
-
-
-
will

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_235.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
··3-
who thought, that they will achieve anything by the balloons.
True, the Crusaders of Freedom in the West are losing more and
more possibilities for conducting enemy activity on the territory
of our Republic. On the frontiers of our country there stands a
vigilant guard which breaks all the attempts of their agents and
so they must be contented with the balloon action which oup
people overtly laughed at and which they condern.
30
They openly say that the entire action was a kind of gansteriom
which not even Hitler dared to commit at the time of the greatest
hatred campaign against Czechoslovakia. When they are bringing
the leaflete which they had found to the security organs and to
the administrative organs, they ask that the action should be
publicly condemned.
This spontaneous disgust concerning the balloon action demon-
strated in which complete isolation, lack of information and
ignorance of the real thinking of our working people do live the
mercenaries of Pres Europe which is the patron of this action.
Pree Europe even broadcast, while propagating the balloons, some
kind of poor poetry in which one says, that Always all the good
things were coming from above" and that our people knew this
Yet our people have got a longer memory than Free Europe believes.
They will remember that good came to them from above from the
West; that it was the bombs which on the eve of the end of the
war were murdering women and children in peaceful residential
quarters of Prague and Piken and which destroyed the Plzen Skoda
Works and the Prague Kolben Works in order to make our reconstruc-
tion more difficult. Later we were getting from above, from
Western Germany a flood of the Colorado beetle which was supposed
to bring us misery and starvation, and they know very well what
American pilots are bringing from above to the women and children
of Korea.
And one more coincidence: One of the boxes with leaflets which
was found near Brezon in the Plzen Region carried the Inscription
Munchen and also with the name of Munich are connected for every
citizen the memories of the worst time of our nations: Che
memories how in reality looks the love of the so-called friends
of our people.
In fact the organizers of the ridiculous and stupid balloon
action spent their dollars or balloons, paper and metal stamps
carrying the emblem of Free Europe which are also being spread.
They can hardly expect any thanks on the part of their employers
because the result is exactly the contrary of the expected. True,
a few business ren finally co their packets full but otherwise
the action was doomed to failure from its very beginning. This
action blown up by Free Europe deflated soon just as its balloons.
'
⚫rk
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_236.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
i
1
4:3 1
7
RFE 7
17-21-53
PHENIX LANG WALKER CHIFFITH FM CONDON
FOLLOWS RADIO PRAGUE ANNOUNCEMENT 0910 TODAY RE NOTE ON BALLOONS.
"THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS HAS SENT THE FOLLOWING NOTE TO THE
EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES ON JULY 20, 1953:
DURING THE PAST DAYS BALLOONS WERE SENT TO CZECHOSLOVAK TERRITORY
WITH LEAFLETS OF A NATURE DESIGNED TO INCITE DISCONTENT OF THE
POPULATION AND TO ENCOURAGE ANTI-STATE ACTIVITIES. THIS NEW ATTEMPT
TO INFLUENCE THE CZECHOSLOVAK WORKING PEOPLE WITH PROPAGANDA MEANS OF
SO PRIMITIVE A LEVEL, UNDERSTANDABLY KET WITH INDIGNANT RESISTANCE,
THAT THE ENTIRE ACTION
WAS PREPARED AND CARRIES OUT BY AMERICAN CITIZENS SENT FOR THIS
PURPOSE TO GERMANY, TO GERMAN TERRITORY UNDER US OCCUPATION ADKINIS-
TRATION. IT IS THEREFORE A NEW INSTANCE WHERE THE UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT ABUSED ITS POSITION AS AN OCCUPATION POWER TOWARDS ENDS
INCOMPATIBLE WITH THE FOUR POWER AGREEMENT ON GERMANY, WHICH BINDS
THE UNITED STATE TO CARRY OUT THE OCCUPATION ACCORDING TO THE BASIC
TENET THAT GERNANY IS NEVER AGAIN TO BECOME A THREAT TO WORLD-
PEACE AND ITS NEIGHBOURS..

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_237.jpeg ---
4-00000
1
1
:
ANCPAIN IMPORTANT FA CK WHICH MAKES THIS LATION OF BASIC
1 V.
PRICIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL LA PARTICULARLY ONJECTIONABLE IS THE
FACT THAT IT TOOK PLACE AT A TIME WHEN THE NATIONS OF THE ENTIRE
WORLD ARE INCREASING THEIR EFFORTS TO STRETHEN THE PEACE AND ASSURE
PEACEFUL COOPERATION.
THE AIM OF THIS PROVOCATIVE ACTION, ORGANIZED UNDER THE PROTECTION
OF
US OCCUPATION AUTHORITIES IS TO INCREASE THE POLICIES OF THE
SO-CALLED COLD WAR AND TO PREVENT A LOOSENING OF INTERNATIONAL TEN-
SION.
FOR THESE REASOS THE GOVERNMENT OF CZECHOSLOVAKIA DECISIVELY PRO-
TESTS AGAINST THIS ACTION AND ASKS THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES TO FURNISH INFORMATION ON THE STEPS TAKEN TO PREVENT SIMILAR
PROVOCATIONS AIMED AGAINST PEACEFUL COEXISTANCE OF NATIONS, REPRE-
SENTING CRUDE INTERFERENCE IN INTERNAL CZECHOSLOVAK AFFAIRS."
END NSV
Nov
:
i
i
1
f

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_234.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
-2-
With words of Justified anger cur citizens core with the leaflets
and they are especially offended by the fact that one of the
leaflets is some kind of a facsimile of the new Czechoslovak crown
stamped on both sides by inflamatory words. Our citizens bold in
esteem the new crown which is firm and valuable and has a great
purchasing power which helped us to get rid of rationing and,
therefore, with sharp and ofter crude words they criticize that
its image had ocen misused as the basis for printing big lies
concerning the government of our republic and the USER,
The second leaflet is propagating the Fascist provocations which
took place on seventeen June in the German Democratic Republic.
When those provocations ended by failure, their organizers ordered
that they should be used at last for the printing of leaflets with
pictures, demonstrating the bandits of Berlin in action; as they
are starting fires or indulging in provocations, etc.
Those pictures belong into the series of the photographs which
the Nazis throatcutters used to take while they were starting
fires in the occupied countries, in the Ukraine; in Crador, in Di
Lidice. It is quite natural that this, too, can only create dig-
gust towards those who have started this criminal action. Besides,
the pictures of the Pascist provocations in Berlin are no senas-
tional neus for us, as the directors of the balloon action obviously
imagine. Similar pictures were published not long ago in our
Svet Prane, It demonstrates the absolute political shortsighted-
near which when people mentioned it is described as atupicity of
the organizers of the balloor action who think that they could
influence our people by leaflets one side of which constitutes
a glorification of hatred and of the attack against peace which
was to take place on 17th June in, Ferlin.
-
In vain is the part of the defender of Czechoslovak working people
and this will always be the same assumed by those, from whose
actions there emanates the wish to start a new murderous war which
is not wanted by any honest working citizen whatever bis
political or his religious opinion. This provocation clearly
demonstrates how the USA reactionary circles plan the lessening
of international tension.
It is a gross heresy just at the time when the pecole of the
entire world are looking forward with hope towards the possibility
of a truce in Korea, when with confidence they are following the
peace policy of USSR, aiming at the peaceful settlement of #11
disputed international questions. I
Therefore, the balloon action was met with sharp condemnation on
the part of our people. The balloor specialists would certainly
not like to hear what the people say when they bring the leaflets
to the SMB and to the National Committees. It is worth noticing.
that ever. such people who so far did not find an active attitude
to the socialist development express their surprise about the
means the rest is employing. And all our people are deeply offended
by the latent violating of the independence cbur State territory.
They are surprised by the great amount of stupidity of the people
¦
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_238.jpeg ---
4-00000
July 25,
1.
Cuches Arval;
Baller (poračkom
The "Cermoni ney of the "Week" quobus ad api
Pravo" dealing with tho proparasion for "y-",
94
"Rudo
No lion
breagent from abroad, no balloon openblen en doby thi
Thot that the plan for "X-Day" which had best proprated Noe
5 years Palled with the Hortin plot,
"
The weekly programs "Unclo Tech Shimico rhiat,
and underestline the algnificeno of the pe
the prison oporabl
This procitat we broadcant by Radio Bava in Slovak
dlalbct, TN Bulls the story of the "cuel. "
Bho
so found newes
of the crown which had been put into the balcons on the
read and of course immodiaboly recognized that they word
only the imitations or the real cromute
lexiong ho onsorod
the tobacconistes shop and when payin; ge
seeldent the crown he had four on the retuɔ
.
ho los girl ;
The only laughed
and told him he could not got anything for they
has to pay with rual Chochoslovak aurichavs

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_239.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
1
21 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR:
ANDU
[SUBJÆCTI
REFERENCE:
DEFUTY DIRECTER (PLANS)
Crech Minister of Foreign Affairs' Note to
America Legation
Meno dated 21 July 1953 - Subjects "Csech
Reactions to Balloon Operation"
1. The Ceech Doak of the Department of State in proparing an
answer to the Czech note which will generally disclaim any U.3.
Governmental responsibility for the balloon operation. The VUA is
being instructed to brush off the Czech note and to cite it as an-
other example of the regime's attempt to prevent the Czech people
from getting the truth.
2. RFE will not comment on the noto except to report the U.S.
reply as a news item, but will comment on the Rude Pravo editorial
taking the line the Casch Government can't let its people know the
truth and also speculating on how many Czechs did not turn in their
pamphlets.
C-10/Branch 1/WPD/mhj
Distribution:
Addressee
-
orig & 1
C-10/Branch 1
2
CIO
1
RI
SRAGEN
THOMAS 5. BRADEN
Chief,
International Organisations Division
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_240.jpeg ---
!
14-00000
SEGET
SECURITY INFORMATION
:
21 July 1953
NETGRANDE POR: DEPUTY DIREX (A)
SUBJECT:
Czech reactions to balloon operation
t
1.
Attached are Czech reactions to the balloon operation
including; the text of a note from the Czech Hinistry of Fortn
Affairs delivered Loday to the American Embassy in Frage.
2. Radio Free Europe han born instructed not to comment
upon this note witil directed.
Attachment: 5/3
Tamas W. Burden
[RADNI
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECURITY INIGANATION
;
NEL

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_242.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
:
C
MUNICH RPX 20 JULY 20, 1993
--
PLEASE NOTE THAT TODAY!S PRAYDA CARRIED
MAJOR PORTION OF RUDE PRAVO BALLOON 830
PEPRINT OF
AL.,
INCLUDING MENTION OF RPE, UNDER TITLE: TONER OF
THE CZECHOSLOVAK PROPLE TO THE PROYACATEURO AND
SLANDERS". UNITED PRESS CARRIED STORY OF RUDE PRAVO
EDITORIAL UNDER VIENNA DATELINE JULY
END
:
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_241.jpeg ---
14-00000
HECRET
EITY INFORMATION
1
Follo Radio Prague announcement 0510 today ra note on balloons:
"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has vent the following note to
the Embassy of the United States on July 20, 1953:
During the past days balloons were sunt to Czechoslovakian terri-
tory with looflets of a nature designed to incite discontent of tho
population ard to oncourage anti-state activition, This now attempt to
influence the Caochi working poople with propaganda means of so primitive
a level, understandably met with indignate instance, that the entire
action uns propared and carried out by American citizens sent for this
purpose to Germany, to Geoman tarriltery under U.3, occupation adminis
tration. It is, therefore, a new instance where the U.S. Government
abused its position as an occupation power towards ends incomparable
with the four power agroumont, en Germany, which binds the U.S. to carry
out the occupation according to the basin tonot that Germany is never
again to boome a threat to mold peace and its noighbora.
Another important factor which makes this now violation of bagla
principle of international law particularly objectionable is the fact
that it took place at a time when the nations of the entire world are
increasing their efforts to strengthen the peace and assure peccafull
cooperation.
The aus of this proverative action, organized under the protection
of U.S. cccupation authorities is to increase the policies of the so-
called cold war and to prevent a loosening of international tensions.
For these reasons the Government of Czechoslovakia decisively pro-
tea against this action and asks the Government of the U.S. to furnish
information on the stops taken to prevent similar provovation aimed
against peaceful co-uxistonse of nations, representing crude interfer
ence in internal Czech affairs.”
i
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_243.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
RESEARCH AND PUBLICATIONS SERVICE
i
July 20, 1953
The following report is one of the first full attacks on the
recent "Boligon Operation" in Czechoslovakia.
over Radio Prague on July 15, 1953:
The text was read
We are ing to read to you new an article from today's Rure Pravo.
The article is called
is called "An Action Doomed
the peace policy of the Soviet Union and of all the countries of
An Action Doomed to Failure". Thanks to
the camp of peace, the conviction that a war can be prevented grew
stronger among the people all through the world.
evolution creates a great concern with those for whom wap consti-
Naturally, this
tutes a source of immeasurable gains and of a luxurious lire.
Therefore the warmongers do their best to put obstacles in the way
which leads towards the lessening of international tension.
Korea the part of the provacateur and saboteur of the peace effort
In
was given to Syngman Rhee.
from the ranks of Nazi war criminals in the democratic sector of
In Germany bandits were used, recruited
Berlin as well as in some other parts of the German Democratic
Republic. And after the failure this much heralded day, there
comes the hypocritical and demagogical offer to help to the popula-
tion of the DDR, which was made for obvious propaganda reasons which,
in fact, was admitted by the Western bourgeois press.
Into this chain of provocations which are aimed against the
strengthening of peace there also belongs the American propaganda
action which was started in the last days in Western Germany
against Czechoslovakia.
the ill-famed "Crutaders for Preedom" were doing it, today again
In a similar way in which two years ago
balloons dispersing inflamatory leaflets over our territon are
being sent from the Bavarian side.
$:
The Munich transmitter Free Europe, financed by Ford and similar
'institutions speaks bombastically of the propaganda balloon
action which, allegedly is the biggest action of this kind which
ever has been attempted and for the direction of which there came
to Western Germany specialists from America..
We can indeed certify that the balloons specialists did not spare
the leaflets in the first two days tens and hundreds of thousands
of those Reaflets are with our police and our national committtees
where they are being brought by our citizens after having teen
discovered. The farmer Hajek from Doubravcice, district of Cecky
Brod, brought an entire parcel of leaflets which came down in one
piece. Josef Korinck frch Zatec brought an entire balloon which
fell down. The leaflets are being brought by the workers of the
Vladimir Lenin Works as well as other factories, by farmers,
railwaymen and children.
only four times bigger
Yet even if the balloon action was not
bigger then the Crusade actior. of 1951, it will bring to lis
as Free Europe says - but hundred times
initiators the very opposite of what they had in mind.
A
'
:
i
į
1
|

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
The Honorable Joseph C. Grow
-
2
-
October 31, 1952
issues, and in one part of the world it is deeply concerned with the very
section of Europe (bout which al NCFE sctivities revolve. Yet the American
public is practically illiterate respecting this are, both its pest and its
present.
I know whereof I speck a result of the inouiry above referred to.
When it is completed I am inclined to think the results will be startling,
particularly if we bear in mind that the i rues at stue must be settled; that
they are a concern to this country; and that our people are practically unirformed.
They know little 1. untidy bout the historical significance behind what has
occurred or will occur of the next few decades unfold becsuse they ave had no
opportunity to lemn the historic significance of it all.
-
In this country today there are approximately 800 colleges and universi-
ties offering four year courses of study rendang to the Hechelor of Arts degree.
This figure does not include the 575 junior colleges which usually conduct non-
degree-granting programs tho yours in length soproximately the first two years
of the traditional four year progrim. As for our incuity her gone it is already
upparent that there are only several dozen institutions in the former group which
offer instruction in this area, and very few in the lotter. Most of those which
do cover this arce are the larger universities where the courses are roully
graduate in character and thus elective. In many instances brier coverage is
supplied in survey courses, but even these can not ena do not develop the atten-
tion that historically this part of the world now deserves. When this survey is
completed a comprehensive report of the findings will be mode. It will refer to
colleges included in a list compiled of the American Council on in which
is the overall representative organization in this country for higher education.
I am colling the attention of the Directers to this situation because it
seems to me we must realize that the American public not only does not know what
we are doing, out actually can not understand the significance of why we are trying
to do it. Generation efter generation has grown up in America illiterate about the
outside world. What we pre discovering concerning the arck of korledge of this
eres will of course prove true of other parts of the lobe such as the Far East
or South Africa.
In our Division we reel this particularly strongly because re cre dependent
on help from the academic world. The plein fact is more and more evident that we
can not rely on American higher eduction a proli is source of assistance. The
relatively few individuals who have studied this region, and who are therefore
qualified to eid us in our efforts, are either too overburdened with demands
made on their time because they are cueillieu, or they are too youn- and inexperi-
enced to be relied on in an enterprise a delicate as the one which we cre
conducting.
There are signs that in some academic localities interest in this field
it developing. However, we can not wit for another generation to emerge
even thougn, under whatever auspices, a pro-ren of training could be implemented to
!
1.0

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_244.jpeg ---
:
2-
f
14-00000
With words of justified anger cur citizens come with the leaflets
and they are especially offended by the fact that one of the
leaflets is some kind of a facrimile of the new Czechoslovak crown
stanped on both sides by inflamatory words. Gur citizens hold in
esteam the new crown which is firm and valuable and has great
purchasing power which helped us to get rid of rationing and,
therefore, with sharp and ofter crude words they criticize that
its image had been misused &ɛ the basis for printing big liem
concerning the government of our republic and the USSR.
.
The second icaflet is propagating the Fasciat provocations which
took place on seventeen June in the derman Democratic Republic.
When those provocations ended by failure, their organizers ordered
that they should be used at last for the printing of leaflets with
pictures, demonstrating the bandits of Berlin in action; as they
are starting fires or indulging in provocations, etc.
Those pictures belong into the series of the photographs which
the Hazio throatcutters used to take while they were starting
fires in the occupied countries, in the Ukraine, in Cradour, in Li
Lidice. It is quite natural that this, too. can only create dis-
gunt towards those who have started this criminal action. Besides
the pictures of the Fascist provocations in Berlin are no sensa-
tional news for us, as the directors of the balloon action cbviously
imagine. Similar pictures were published not long ago in our
Svet Frace It demonstrates the absolute political shortsighted-
nest hit when people mentioned it is described as stupidity or
the organizers of the balloor action who think that they could
influence our people by leaflets one side of which constitutes
a glorification of hatred and of the attack against peace which
was to take place on 17th June in Berlin.
neub
In vain 1s the part of the defender of Czechosloval: working people
and this will always be the same assumed by those, from whose
actions there emanates the wish to start a new murderous war which
'
is not wanted by any honest working citizen whatever be. his
political or his religious opinion. This provocation clearly
demonstrated how the USA reactionary circles plan the lessering
of international tension.
It is a gro63 heresy just at the time when the people of the
entire world are looking forward with hope towards the possibility
of a truce in Korea, when with confidence they are following the
peace policy of USSR, aiming at the peaceful settlement of all
disputed international questions.
Therefore, the balloon action wan net with sharp condemnation on
the part of our people. The balloor specialists would certainly
not like to hear what the people say when they bring the leaflets
to the SNB and to the National Committees. It is worth noticing
that ever: such people who so far did not find an active attitude
to the socialist development express their surprise about the
means the West is employing. Arid all our people are deeply offended
by the latent violating of the Independence of our State permitory.
They are surprised by the great amount of stupidity of the people
-

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_246.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
CONFIDENTIAL
1.
Draft Hote to Conchoalovak Government
Vortatin Toxt
Following is text note for transmission FONOFF in reply to its
note July 20.
Bogin text. The American Embassy presents its compliments to the
Czechoslovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs and with reference to the
Ministry's Note of July 20, 1953, concerning the rolease of halloons
from the U3 Zone of Cormairy has the honor, upon instructions of the US
Government, to nako the following reply:
1
The balloons apparently in question were not released by any official
agency of this Government but by the Crusade for Frondom, an organisation
established by private Amorican citizens. The US Government has ascertainod
that the balloons were roloased for the purpose of communicating with tha
people of Czechoslovakia.
It is a fundamental conviction of the American Government and people
that free communication between peoples constitutes a principle spon
which the very life of the international community should be founded. If
.
any government attempts to erect a wall sealing off its people from con-
tact with the outside world, it is inevitable that ways will be found
both by the people inside that country and by the peoples of other countries
outside to penetrate that artificial barrior and maintain some line of
contact with one another. The use by those outside of such media as
balloons confirms that the Czechoslovak Government has created a barrier
interfering with free communication. The US believes that the dest
assurance that this means of communication will not be used is to obviate
the need for it by permitting what is natural and necessary in the modern
world, namely, free contact between nations and the free exchange of
information and idoas.
CONFIDENTIAL,
As for

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_249.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
"
-
UNCLASSIFIED
DD/P
RESTRICTED
CONFIDENTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIF…..SION TOP AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
-
SECRET
INITIALS
DATE
1-4
FROM
-
CIO
R
APPROVAL
ACTION
fite NEFE
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
INITIALS
TWB
☐
DATE
4 June
SIGNATURE
ALTURN
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
REMARKS:
PREPARATION OF REPLY
EPLY
DISPATCH
☐ RECOMMENDATION
☐ FILE
Attached is Mr. Durkee's recommendation in
respect to Mr. Zygmunt Nagorski, Jr., International
Federation of Free Journalists and the Free European
Press Service. His recommendation is that we do
not support this organisation for PW or intelligence
purposes. I concur in it.
FORM
see 2 June Chrons
SECRET
SEP. 30-4
CONFIDENTIAL
TWB
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED
18-68796-1
U. B. GOT PATI OFFICE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_245.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-3-
:
!
S
who thought that they will achieve anything the balloons
True, the Crusaders of Freedom in the feat are losing mix and
more possibilities for conducting enemy, activity on the territory
of our Republic On the frontiers of our country there stands a
vigilant guard which breaks all the attemple of their agama and
no they must be contented with the balloon set which
people overtly laughed at and which they condern,
7
They openly say that the entire action was a kind of gana rin
which not even cler dared to commit at the time of the reatest
Hitler
hatred clapiainst Crecheslovania.
the leaflets which they had found to the
the adriutstrative organs, they ask that
publicly conderined.
string organs and so
then they are bringing
the action anould þar
This spontaneous discust concerning the ballot action damn-
atrated in which complete Isolation, lack of information and
ignorance of the real thinking of our working people do e che
mercenaries of Free Europe which is the patron of this aachen.
Pree Europe even broadcast, while propagating the ballons some
as
kind of poor poetry in which one says, that "Always all the good
things were coming from above" and that our people knew this"
residential
Yet our people have got a longer menory than Pres Europe believes.
They will remember what good came to them from anove from the
Weat; that it was the bombs which on the eve of the ord
war were murdering women and children in peace
quarters of Prague and Fizen and which destrogid the Plzen Skeda
Works and the frague Holben Works in order to make our penstruem
tion more difficult. Later we wer: getting from above,
Western Germany a flood of the Colorado beetle whian was sugrosed
to bring us misery and starvation, and they know very well that
American pilots are bringing from all ove to the mom
of Korea.
women and children
And one more coincidender One of the boxes with leaflets which
was found near Eperce in the Plzen Region carried the inscription
Munchen and also with the name of Hunich are connected for every
citizen the memories of the worst time of our nations:
memories how in reality looks the love of the called frus
of our people.
.
a
--
In fact the organizers of the ridiculous and stupid balloom
action spent their dollars or hallovas, paper and stal s
carrying the embler of Free Europe, which are also being spe
They can hardly expect any thanks on the part of their ep
because the result is exactly the contrary of the expected.
a few business en finally got their chats out there
the action was decried to failure from its very beginning.
p
action blown up by Fres Europe deflated soon just as its balcons
.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_25.jpeg ---
14-00000
The Honorable Jose h G. Grow
-
-3-
October 31, 1952
correct the situation. The important question is what can we do about it and
what shall we do.
As already stated, the inquiry above mentioned grew out of our attempts
to discover poople in American higher education who are qualified to help us.
We suspected they were not numerous, nut we are amazed at the mill numbor.
We
shall continue to try to persuade then to help us, but that well had begun to
nun dry already.
..
Cen those associated with un domnything to emphosise this situation
strongly enough in some quarters so the something will be attempted to correct
it? Obviously this is not a propend within the scope of NCFE; the
problem concerns all colleges, universitie seconde:y cells nd the enormouc
field designated as adult education. Responsibility may even rest with the
Government itself.
,
I shall appreciate your suggestions, and will send you the final report
of this survey when completed.
Enclosure:
"Youth in the Soviet batellite States"
:
Cincurely yours,
Levering Tyson
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_247.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONPI FIAL
-
2
!
¡
:
:
As for the content of the mosnagan carried to Caechoslovakia by
this medium, it is understood that they contained information on current
developments in Contral and Eastern Europe and in addition various
statements focusing on the idea of "freedom". There would be no reason
for a government to bo disturbed about the principle of freedom in a
message to its people, if conditions of freedon actually existed in that
country. One cannot readily believe that the Czechoslovak Government
would even raise this issue with the US Government if the fundamental
freedoms were observed in Czechoslovakia and if the Czechoslovak Govern-
mont were not now especially concerned about the attitude of the poople
toward the absence of those freedoms.
The US Government cannot agree that the transmission of those
messages to the people of Czechoslovakia from the territory of the US
Zona of Gervany by the Crusade for Freedom Committee involved any mizuso
of the position of the US as an occupying power. Such communication is
clearly not contrary to any cuadripartite agreements affecting Cormany.
Nor does such communication violate any other international agreement to
which the US Government is a signatory.
With reference to afforts to strengthen world peace the US, as is
generally known, has endeavored in overy practicable way to work stop by
stap, in accordance with the deep interests of the American people In
permanent peace and in cooperation with other countries, toward building
an erduring structure of international peace and stability. The US socks
to help bring about a relaxation of international tension wherever there
are genuine possibilities of doing so. It is recognized at the same time
that true international tranquillity presupposes conditions which assure
human rights and fundamental freedoms for the people concerned. End text/
Cable soonest intended date delivery so press release may be issued hore.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_251.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
MATION
1
10, Attn: Kr. Lurkeo
VIA, Chief, EZ
IC/EE/F
20 July 1953
Proposed Balloon Campaign in Event President Offers Food to Poland
1. With reference to our discussion of 17 July, attached hereto is
a sample of the coupon which it is recommended that the Crusade for Freedom
distribute by balloon from Germany in the event that a Presidential offer of
This coupon reads 0
food for Poland is refuted by the Polish Government,
follows:
The bearer of this coupon is entitled to receive from the food
supplies donated by Americanst
(food listed will be those specifically offered)
Stamped across the coupon are the words, "Invalid due to the
rejection of the offer by The Polish 'Peoples' Republic".
2.
We are advising the Frankfurt mission of this plan and requesting
their estimate of the number of leaflets which they could release by balloon
from the Baltic. Please advise us whether or not your printing facilities
can supply the German wiition with whatever number of leaflets they undertake
to distribute. We, on the other hand, will advise you soonest of the number
of balloons we will require from your clocks and the acaress to which they
are to be consigned.
3. In the event that the Crusade desires to includo a printed message
on the reverse of the leaflet, it is requested that the text of the messago
be cleared either with this desk or with the German mission prior to
printing.
Attachment:
EE/F: Chouaruins
20 July 1953
2 Addressee
1 RI
2 EE/P
see
ace Dike's
reply saguly
WALPOLE LAVIS
Deputy
Chief

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_248.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
;
:
:
:
Inforation
Follows Redio Prague amouncement 0510 today re note on
bulloons:
"The Hiidctry of Formign Affairs has sent the following note to the
Embassy of the United States on July 20, 1953:
to
During the past days balloons were sent to Czech territory with
leaflets of a nature designed to insight discontent of the population
and to encourage anti-state activities. This new attempt to influence
the Chech working people with propryganda means of so primitive a level, ·
understandably met with indignate instance, that the entire action was
prepared and cried out by American citizens sent for this purpose
Germany, to German Sorrity under US occupation administration. It is
therefore a now instans are the US Government abuse in position as
an occupation power towards ends incomparable with the four power agrVO-
mant on Ga mary, which binds the US to carry out the occupation according
to the basic tenet that is never again to become a threat to
world peace and its neighbors.
Another important factor which makes this new violation of basic
principle of international law particularly objectionable is the fact
that it took place at a time when the nations of the entire world are
increasing their efforts to strengthen the peace and assure peaceful
cooperation,
The aim of this provocative action, organized under the protection
of US occupation authorities is to increase the policies of the so-called,
cold war and to prevent a loosening of international tensions.
For these reasons the Government of Czech decisively protest against
this action and asko the Coverment of the US to furnish information on
the steps taken to prevent sdilar porrccation aimed against peaceful
co-existance of nations, representing crude interference in internal
Czech affairs."
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_252.jpeg ---
14-00000
?
MEMORANDUM FOR: IO/PP
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
Mr. Thoman Braden
Mr. Kenneth Dean Koch
16 July 1953
.
1. In January of this year I discussed with your office the
retention of Kenneth Dean. Koch in Berlin as RFE representative,
due to his extensive usefulness to FI in Berlin, providing FI
with cover facilities; leads, general services and working very
satisfactorily in supporting the FI mission in Berlin. At that
time I was assured by 10 that they would do everything possible
to retain ltr. Koch in Berlin as the RFE representative. In May
of this year I had occasion to visit Bob Lang in New York on
another matter and I again touched upon Mr. Koch's assignment in
Berlin, at which time Kr. Lang assured me that no changes would
be made in Koch's assignment in Berlin without prior clearance
with me.
He also emphasized that no man would be sent to Berlin
who did not meet with our complete approval. In the meantime,
Koch was sent to Israel to set up the FFE office but seemingly
met with opposition on the part of Israel authorities and has
returned to Germany with no definite job envisaged for him.
John Elliott has takon over the RFE office in Berlin and there
seems to be no attempt to make any concessions to FI wishes in
Berlin.
2. We find this solution an extremely unsatisfactory one.
Elliott, by background, general character, and ability, is not
as useful to FI in Berlin as Koch was and I seriously doubt that
RFE would find him as catisfactory as Koch in standard RFE busineos.
I know Elliott when he was a newspaper man, and I have checked with
several of his former colleagues who agree that he does not have
any of the hard-hitting qualities sc desirable for an FFE repre-
sentative in Berlin. This is not an attempt to belittle his.
ability as a journalist but the job in Berlin is very much more
than that. In short, I would appreciate your office taking steps
with RFE to return Dean Koch to Berlin as RFE representative, since
his services to FI are very much desired even on a part-time basis.
Our main reason for wanting Koch in Berlin is that the RFE office
attracts a large percentage of Satellite refugees and as such it
is important for us to have the head of the RFE office in Berlin
:
Security
1
I
:
A
SALT, P. s.
=
M

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_254.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
1
SCONET
Security Inforination
Read by Winer
7/17/53
16 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS).
SUBJECT:
RFE Report on recent Soviet Zone
Politburo Meeting
1. Attached herewith, I am forwarding you a cable
which has just been received in New York from Munich.
2. The information contained therein was transmitted
by the RFE correspondant in Hamburg, Major Ramsey, who reported❤
ly got it from a usually reliable British SIS contact.
3. RFK has asked us to treat this information with extreme
caution and strictly as speculation.
Attachment: 8/8
Signed) DOMAS W. DEN
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Scitation

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_250.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
MAN FOR:
c/vc
;
ADJECT:
SECRET
Sanurity Informati
2015
Zymunt tayoraki; Free Purapoen Prens Service;
International Fideration of tree do realisty
Home to P/P Prc/dtd 12. June, sane subject.
•
1. I have read with interest ti e reforence so jorandům which
concludes with recordations a alast the stillation of lingorsid
and bin "or; anization" in connection with PP rators, including
01-9,
diecerinction activities. 11. in my recollection that there and
buên e previos recomandation against the use of this individual
and his colleagues and arrociates as sources of information. It in
my further recollection that in part as the rosult of a reco-mundo-
them which we received from C. D. Jackson, we recently granted a
very encett (3500 per month) subsidy to cover a try-ort period of
a few months' duration.
7. 111 you plente advise no if I am wrong on any of my
polata of recollection un edlented shore. 10, on the other hand,
my recollection in accurate, will you plente prepare for my signa-
ture a brief communication suitable for transmittal to Mr. C..)).
Jackson and minting, in effect, that whereas we did in fact go for-
word with a modest cuboidy for a three (7) month period, we have
now had en opportunity to re-exnine tiis cfsituation inditall,
including the identity and eberacter of Nacersei's sources and
anneciatus, and have renched the conclusion that we have no interest
or desire to continue our cupport and relations) ip with Naporski
beyond the conclusion of the trial period.
1 CC: 0/16
C/10
Attachmentst
hef. meno and tale.
i
}
(Shar
13.
Bonuty Director (Plans)
SECRET
4237.
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_253.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
:
Security Information
- 2.
cognizant of our intelligence interests in order to be able to
channel the right type of refugee to our doorstep. Furthermore,
in many cases the RFE representative can perform valuable screen-
ing and cutout functions which would preserve his own cover and
yet save us valuable time and effort.
3. I would appreciate any action you can take on this
subject and refer you to IN 40404 from Berlin which is attached.
Please keep me advised on any progress you make in this case,
Attachments IN 40404
PETER SICHEL
Chief, EE/FI
Security Information
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_255.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
SOVIET ZONE POLITBURO MEETING
Cable dated 7/16/53 from Shinich to New York
"
"East German aling President Wilhelm Piook is definitely on the
way out, reliable sources in close contacts with the East German Govern-.
ment said here today. The sources stated that Plock's ouster was dis
closed during an East-West German Communist Politburo moeting which
ended in East Germany on July 12. Top Gorman Communist leaders were
also told that East German Secret Police Chief, Wilholm Zaisser, is
now suspended or under house arest. Zuisser was arrested for publics-
tion of casúlty figures of the June 17 revolt, the source said. His.
ouster also falls in line with recent Communist policy shifts all over
the Red Empire, they said. At the meeting it was disclosed that SED
head Walter Ulbricht will remain a potent force in East German politics.
despite recent rumors of his impending purge. Premier Otto Grotewohl
will be given increased power in the new government set-up, the sources
said. During a discussion of recent events in the Soviet at the Polit-
buro meeting, the Communist leaders were given information from Moscow
reporting that Foreign Minister. Holotov will emerge during the next
month as the key figure in the Soviet Union. Premier Malenkov will
serve as a figurehead for Holotov, the sources revealed. The Red Army
is fast becoming a major political force in Russia and several generals
have been recalled from outpost areas by order of Molotov, the sources
said. The USSR is suffering from acute shortages of raw materials,
especially rubber and oil, as well as strategic metals of the rarer
varieties, it was disclosed at the meeting. In view of this, the top
Communists were told that Russia would continue its "peace offensive"
for at least another year. The sourfes, reported to be "highly re-
liable", said that the revelations released at the meeting were to be
used as "policy directives" by East and West Communist leaders."
-
:
NOTE:
FYI. "This information was released through our Central News with
the warning to treat with extreme caution, adding that Political Ad-
visor's office agreed it is of most explosive nature and should be
handled strictly as speculation.#
SECRET
:
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_256.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
:
:
VII)
:
i.
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
:
15 July 1953
4.3527.
1-
Noted b
"
4
$ augss. 932
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR, CENTRAL INTELLICENCE ACENCY
SUBJECT:
Purge of Beria
Attached herewith is a guidance received by
RFE on the purge of berin.
Attachment,
Cil Mayor f
Deputy Chief,
International Organisations Division
:
!
L
SECRET
4.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_257.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
PROVISIONAL GUT DANCE: PURGE OF ENZIA
I
BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS:
(THIS WILL BE ISSUED LATER IN MORE URTAIL AS SOON AS TIME PRIMITS.)
THE FOLLOW NG FACTS, HOWEVER, STAND OUT IMMEDIATELY:
1. NO PERSON OF DERIA'S RANK IN THE SOVIET UNION HAS FALLEN SINCE BERIA
HILSEL? REPLACED YEZHOV IN 1938; THE PURCE COULD NOT HYING ATA HIGHER LEVEL.
THE CHARGES AGAINST BERIA (OF BEING A BOURGEOIS RENEGADE IMPERIALIST AGENT WHO
-THⱭED TO OVERTHROY THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT, `DESTROY THE COMMUNIST PARTY AND RE-
ESTABLISH CAPITALISM IN THE USOR) ARE OF A MAGNITUDE COMPARABLE ONLY TO THOSE
AGAINST THE TROTSKYI DES AND THE RIGHTSTS IN THE 1920'3.
2. THE STRUGGLE FOR THE SUCCESSTON TO STAIN IS DEVELOPING MUCH MORE
RAPIDLY THAN AFTER THE DEATH OF LEGEM. IT TOOK POUR TEARS FOR STALIN TO RE-
MOVE THE RIGHTISTS. FURTHERMORE, COME DERING THE SHIPT TO THE RIGHT IN THE
EAST GERMANY AND HUNGARY, AND THE ANNOUNCIAT AS DATE AS A WEEK OR SO AGO OF
* PRO-NATIONALIST CHANGES IN TADJIKISTAN, THE DECISION IN THE STRUGGLA MUST
HAVE HAPPENED ONLY WITHIN THE LAST PER DAYS. BERIA'S ABSENCE (WHEN ALL THE
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE POLITBURO WERE PRESENT) AT THE BOLSHOI THEATRE ON JUNE
28 WAS ONE OF THE FIRST PUBLIC INDICATIONS OF HIS APPROACHING FALL; THE JULY
8 EDI TURIAL OF IZVESTIA, THE SECOND.
3. THE FORCES WHICH DESTROYED SHITA ARE CERTAINLY A COLLECTIVE GROUP, NOT
SIMPLY MALENKOV HIMSELF. MALENKOV'S NALLE APPEARS ONLY ONCE IN THE ANNOUNCEMENT
AND THE PRAVDA EDITORIAL EMPHASIZES COLLECTIVE LEADERSHIP MORE THAN EVER BEFORE.
4. THE PRAVDA FDI TORIAL MARKS A NEW REVERSAL IN THE GENERAL LINE-AWAY
FROM RIGHTISM AND TOWARD LEFTIST EX THEHISH, OR PERHAPS KORK ACCURATELY AWAY FROM
EXTREMISK,
MODERATION AND TOWARD; - FASCIST EXTENISIL THE SHIFT TO AN EXTREAST COURSE
IS BASICALLY IN TWO QUESTIONS :
A. THE NATIONALITIES QUESTI ON
B. AGRICULTURAL COLLECTIVIZATION
IT IS NOW CLEAR THAT BERIA WAS PRO-NATIONAL MINORITY AND ANTI-INTENSIFICATION
OF COLLECTIVIZATION. THE GROUP WHICH HAS REMOVED HIM IS IRO-GREAT RUSSIAN AND
PRO-COLLECTI VISATION. IT IS RETURNING TO THE STALINIST LINE. WILL THE DOCTORS'
PLOT BE REVIVED? THE SLANSKY TRIAL? SLANSEY-TYPE TRIALS`IN THE SATELLITES?
5. NOT ONLY BERIA HIMSELF HAS PALLEN BUT THE SHOLE APPARATUS OF THE SECRET
POLICE IS DENOUNCED, WILL LOSE. MUCH FACE AND IMPORTANCE AND WILL BE SUBJECTED
TO A TREMENDOUS PURGE, WHICH MUST SHAKE, THE WHOLE GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE TO ITS
FOUNDATIONS.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_258.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
:
SECURITY INFORMATION
:
J
-
8. THIS FRACE OFFERERVE WILL ASLY CONTINUE ON THE INTERNATIONAL SCENE---
BUT WILL ABVS NOW A PORORDE PROPAGANDA CHARACTER; NO GENUINE CONCESSIONS (E. O.,
KEYS
SURRSHINING OF EAST GRAY) WILL NOW TAKE PLACE. ON THE INTERNAL SCENE IN
THE SOVIES SPINE THERE WELL CONTOARE TO BE TALK OF IMPROVING THE LIVING STAN-
DARDS OF FRDARKERS 16 ACTUALITI THE COURSE WILL BE TOWARD INCREASED
CAPITAL INTENDENT AT EXPENSE OF CONSUMER GOODS PARTICULARLY IN THE SATEL
LITES.
II. GUIDANT:
.
CAUTION: AS BEFORE, WE SPECULATE OF FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE KREMLIN AND THE
SATELLITS ĠONESIES BON EX DO NOT ACCEPT ANY ONE PARTICULAR THEORÝ.
THE END OF THE FIRST ACT ? THE MONCH STRUGGLE FOR THE SUCCESSION, BUT ONLY THE
THIS IS
FIRST ACT; NERS ARE AND BLOOPER ACTS TO COME. THE COALITION WHICH
DESTROYED SERIA IS JUST AS SUBJECT TO INTERNAL DISSENSION AS WAS THE MALENKOV-
BERIA ROTCY COALITION PURED AFTER THE DEATH OF STALIN.
HERE IS TO STALIN'S TACTICS AFTER THE DEATH OF LEMIN.
THE BASIC ANALOGY
TROTSKY AND ELESTISE THE NEW COALITION NOELTHINATES BRIA); THEN HE
FIRST HE ELIMINATED
ELIMINATED THE RIGHTISTS (PROBABLY THE NEXT ACT IN THIS PRESENT DRALA WILL IN-
VOLVE ELIMINATION OF THE PAST OF THE COALITION BY THE RISING ELEMENT IN IT).
A. TO THIS PEOPLE:
AS THE SOLSKENT NS DEMOGR EACH OTHER EVEN MORE FEROCIOUSLY, OUR PEOPLES CAN
LOOK ON AIT PLEASURE AND LISTANCE WHILE MIR OPPRESSORS ARE BAKING THEMSELVES
WEAKER AND BEY (THE PASTORG BU OYRAN PROPLES) ARE BECOMING STRONGER. WHEN THE
KREMLIN IS WRAKENED BY LINDERSION THE SATELIJTE KRMALINS ARE EVER MORE WEAK-
AND FARALYTID, AND OP CO DROH THE POROK HAS JUST BEGUN.
MUNIST KIG SHOTS WILL BE 100 OCCUPIED WITH SAVING THEIR OWN SKINS TO BE AS
LOCAL SATELLITE COM-
TYRANNICAL AS EXPONS. TELE COULD NOT COKE AT A BETTER TIME FOR THE PEASANTS
AND WORKERS OF RASTERN EEROPE: AFTIE EASTERN GERMAN REVOLTS AND CZECHOSLOVAK
DEMONSTA TION, MAY NOT KARTOIA OIL STRENGTH AND THEIR OWN POWER.
ARE HARSHALLING THEIR SORDES, THEIR TYRANTS' STRUCTURE OF CONTROL IS CRACKING,
AS THEY
THE EVEN FUAL FOGH OF COMWISH HAS NEVER MORE CERTAIN THAN N07.
CERTAINLY SY, AS THE KRE IS TALING, TO PRESENT A FACADE OF "HONOLITHIC
THE REGIMES WILL
UNITY." BUT YOU KNOW, AS THEY KNOW, THAT THE FACADE IS HOLLOW AND THAT THE
REGIMES, CONFUSED AND RENT WITH INTERNAL HISSENSTON, WILL PROBABLY NOT DE ALLE
TO UNDERTAKS AND ONE CIELAR AND DECISIVE POLICH. HOWEVER, WE SHOULD WARN THE
PEOPLE THAT THIS SHIFT TO EXTREMISM MAY MEAN (IN HUNGARY IN PARTICULAR) THAT
THE KREMLIN ORDER IS PUPPETS TO ME A MORE EXTREME COURSE THAN BEFORE
(BUT HERS ALSO IS MUST WAIT AND SEE-CONFUSION NOW REIGNS EVERYWHERE). NOW IS
THE TIES IN THIS PERIOD OF CONTUSION, POR THE PROPLE TO SECURE THE GAINS THEY
HAVE ALREADY MADE AND PROED ON FOR WORE. IN AVERY REAL SENSE, THE PEOPLE RE
MORE THAN SVERY ACNRS ON THE STAGE RATHER THAN SPECTATORS IN THE AUDIENCE..
LED BY YOUR NEW LEADERS, TUJH THE PEOPLE. HUST CONTINUE YOUR EFFORTS IN THE COL-
LECTIVE FASAS AND IN THE MALE UNIONS, IN THE WAYS YOU KNOW SO WELL, TU FORCE
THE REGINS TO MURE ACTUAL OUNCESSIONS TO IGU.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_260.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION.
15 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR DIRECTOR, CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
SUBJECT:
Purge of Baria
Attached herewith is a guidance received by
RFE on the purge of Beria.
Attachment
CORU MEYER, JR.
CORD METER, JR.
Deputy Chief,
International Organizations Division
:
SECRET
----

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
!
10 July 1952
1. At the last Project Review Committee meeting on NCFE, you
asked that the State Department be consultod on policy in respect
to National Councils. A roview by State has begun. Moantime,
however, for your information and in order to enable you to answer
questions which may be raised by Moscro. Dolboare or Miller, I want
to explain to you how the IO Division is presently handling exile
affairs.
2. The difficulty in this matter arises largely from the
fact that three organizations are doing the job. Stato has appar-
ently found it necessary to deal directly with axiles. CIA area
divisions, FE and SE, also deal directly with exiles for area.
purposes. NCFE hands out the money and tries to keep them together
in National Councils. Out of this triplo play a large degree of
bad feeling and mistrust has arison between CIA and State on the
one hand and NCFE on the other. State, including Wally Barbour,
and the area divisions of CIA accuse NCFE of playing personal petty
favorites and of not keeping us informed. On the other hand, coop-
eration of State and CIA with NCFE in giving positive continuing
guidance in their efforts has not been forthcoming. In the past
no coordinated attempt has bean made to give NOTE high-lovol
over-all policy direction. Relations have been personal, casual,
uncoordinated, and sometimes confusing.
3. We have taken the following action to try to insure
orderly efforts to fuse or coordinate the various oxile activities
conducted by the three organizations;
"
8. This division has asked the concerned area divisions
to initiate plans for reorganization and unification of
each national council. The resultant paper is then
coordinated with the proper authorities in State and a final
line is agreed upon.
b. This plan is then communicated to NCFE and the
organisation is asked for comments, criticisms and
suggestions.
C. After such are made or agreed upon, the paper
becomes the policy directive which charts NCFE's course of
action.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_259.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
:
B
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
D. TO THE COLATUMISES,
THE KREMIIN IS RIGHT IN ONE POINT--THIS IS AN EVENT OF IMMENS: SIGNIFICANCE.
IT PROVED ONCE MONE, AND MORE PRANATICALLY THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE THE THIRTIES,
THAT NO COMMUNIST CAN EVER BE SAFE. THOSE OF YOUR LIKE ZAPOTUCKY WHO TRIED TO
HEDGE IN HIS BRATISLAVA SPRECH ON THE NATIONALIST ISSUE; THOSE OF YOU LIKE NAGY,
GERO AND BATA WHO BECAME THE SYMBOLS OF THE RIGHTIST COURSE-YOU ARE SUITABLE
OFFERINGS FOR THE NEW SLAUGHTER. AND THOSE COMMUNIST LEADERS WHO HAVE NOT RECOVE
PREMATURE RIGHTIST DEVIAMOIST WILL. NOW UNDOUBTEDLY TRY TO BECOME EXTREMISTS
AS FAST AS POSSIBLE-NO MATTER HOW MANY OF THEIR COMRADES THEY MUST DRAG DOWN
IN A NEW PURGE. AND WHAT IS THE POINT OF TRYING TO BECOME AN EXTREMIST AGAIN?
YOU KNOW THAT THE NEW SOVIET DICTATOR (REERGABER WE CANNOT BE SURE WHO HE WILL
BE, HAVING ELIMINATED BERIA, WILL NOT TRY TO EIZONATE BERIA'S OPPONENTS.
COMMUNISTS (SEE CAFCHOSLOVAK GUIDANCE NUMBER TEN) YOU HAVE ONLY TWO CHOICES.
AS
YOU CAN AID THE PEOPLE AND SABOTAGE THE REGIME, THUS CROSSING THE "GOLDEN BRIDGE"
TO SAFETY, OR YOU CAN FLED. THERE IS NO OTHER CHOICE.
C. TO THE SECRET POLICE:
YOUR TURN HAS NOW COME. IF ALL THE PEOPLE THAT BERIA PROMOTED AND ALL THIS
LOCALNORGANG OF THE ID IN THE USSR ARE TO BE PURCED, AS IS NOW ANNOUNCED, WHAT
DO YOU THINK WILL HAPPY TO YOUR FOOR MARIONETTES IN THE SATELLITES?
EVEN IESS CHANCE TO SURVIVE THAN THE ORGINARY COMMUNIST,
YOUR PEACE WITH THE PEOPLE OR YOU CAN FLEE.
YOU HAVE
AGAIN, YOU CAN MAKE
OTHERWISE, YOUR DOOM IS CERTAIN.
NOTE:
AS YOU WILL SEE FROM THE ABOVE, OUR PRESENT LINE (THE INCREASING STRENGTH OF THIS
PEOPLE, THE INCREASING WEAKNESS OF THE REGINE) REMAINS INTACT. CZECHOSLOVAK
GUIDANCE NUMBER TEN E ALMOST COMPLETELY INTO THE NEW CIRCUMSTANCES AND LEJST NOW
BE IMPLEMENTED (WITH APPROPRIATE CHANGES FOR HUNGARY AND POLAND) WITH RENEWED
VIGOR.
END MESSAGE
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_261.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
PROVISIONAL GUIDANCE: PURGE OF BERIA
I BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS:
(THIS WILL BE ISSUED LATER IN MORE DETAIL AS SOON AS TIME PERMITS.)
THE FOLLOWING FACTS, HOWEVER, STAND OUT IMMEDIATELY:
1. NO PERSON OF BERIA'S RANK IN THE SOVIET UNION HAS FAILEN SINCE BERIA
HIMSELF REPLACED YEZHOV IN 1938; THE PURGE COULD NOT HEING ATA HIGHER LEVEL.
THE CHARGES AGAINST SERIA (OF BEING A BOURGEOIS RENEGADE IMPERIALIST AGENT WHO
TRIED TO OVERTHROW THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT, DESTROY THE COMMUNIST PARTY AND RE-
ESTABLISH CAPT TALISH IN THE USSR) ARE OF A MAGNITUDE COMPARABLE ONLY TO THOSE
AGAINST THE TROTSKYI TES AND THE RIGHTISTS IN THE 1920'S.
20 THE STRUGGLE FOR THE SUCCESSION TO STAIN IS DEVELOPING MUCH MORE
RAPIDLY THAN AFTER THE DEATH OF LEMIN. IT TOOK FOUR YEARS FOR STALIN TO RE
MOVE THE RIGHTISTS. FURTHERMORE, CONSIDERING THE SHIFT TO THE RIGHT IN THE
EAST GERMANY AND HUNGARY, AND THE ANNOUNCEMENT AS LA TE AS A WEEK OR SO AGO OF
# PRO-NATIONALIST CHANGES IN TADJIKISTAN, THE DECISION IN THE STRUGOLE MUST
HAVE HAPPENED ONLY WITHIN THE LAST FİK DAYS. BERIA'S ABSENCE (WHEN ALL THE
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE POLITBURO WERE MUESENT) AT THE BOLSHOI THEATRE ON JUNE
28 WAS ONE OF THE FIRST PUBLIC INDICATIONS OF HIS APPROACHING FALL; THE JULY
8. EDITORIAL OF IZVESTIA, THE SECOND.
30 THE FORCES WHICH DESTROYED BETIA ARE CERTAINLY A COLLECTIVE GROUP, NOT
SIMPLY MALENKOV HIMSELF. MALENKOV'S NAME APPEARS ONLY ONCE IN THE ANNOUNCEMENT
AND THE PRAVDA EDITORIAL EMPHASIZES COLLECTIVE LEADERSHIP MORE THAN EVER BEFORE.
4. THE PRAVDA EDITORIAL MARKS A NEW REVERSAL IN THE GENERAL LINE-AWAY
FROM RIGHTISM AND TOWARD LEFTIST EXTREMISM, OR PERHAPS MORE ACCURATELY AWAY FROM
MODERATION AND TOWARD; FASCIST EXTREMISM. THE SHIFT TO AN EXTREMIST COURSE
IS BASICALLY IN TWO QUESTIONS:
A. THE NATIONALITIES QUESTION
B. AGRICULTURAL COLLECTIVIZATION
IT IS NOW CLEAR THAT BERIA WAS PRO-NATIONAL MINORITY AND ANTI-INTENSIFICATION
OF COLLECTIVIZATION. THE GROUP WHICH HAS REMOVED HIM IS PRO-GREAT RUSSIAN AND
PRO-COLLECTIVISATION. IT IS RETURNING TO THE STALINIST LINE. WILL THE DOCTORS'
PLOT BE REVIVED? THE SLANSKY TRIAL? SLANSKY-TYPE TRIALS IN THE SATELLITES?
5. NOT ONLY BERIA HIMSELF HAS FALLEN BUT THE SHOLE APPARATUS OF THE SECRET
POLICE IS DENOUNCED, WILL LOSE MUCH FACE AND IMPORTANCE AND WILL BE SUBJECTED
TO A TREMENDOUS PURGE, WHICH MUST SHAKE THE WHOLE GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE TO ITS
FOUNDATIONS.
SECRET
j
.
:
}

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_263.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
:
B. TO THE COMMUNISTS:
THE KREMLIN IS RIGHT IN ONE POINT--THIS IS AN EVENT OF IMMERS: SIGNIFICANCE.
IT PROVES ONIE ZONE, AND ANORE TRAMA HICALLY THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE THE THIRTIES,
THAT NO COMMIST CAN EVER SAFE. THOSE OF YOUR LIKE ZAPOTOCKY WHO TRIED TO
HEDGE IN HIS GATISLAVA SPEECH ON THE NATIONALIST ISSUE; THOSE OF YOU LIKE NAGY,
GERO AND BATA HO BECAME THE SYMBOLS OF THE RIGHTIST COURSE-YOU ARE SUITABLE
OFFERINGS FOR THE NEW SLAUGHTER. AND THOSE COMMUNIST LEADERS WHO HAVE NOT BECOME
PREMATURE RIGNIST DEVIATIONIST WILL NOW UNDOUBTEDLY TRY TO BECOME EXTREMISTS
AS FAST AS PASIBLE_NO MATTER HOW MANY OF THEIR COMRADES THEY MUST DRAG DOWN
IN A NEW PURGE. AND WHAT IS THE POINT OF TRYING TO BECOME AN EXTREMIST AGAIN?
YOU KNOW THAT THE NEW SOVIST DICTATOR (REMBER WE CANNOT BE SURE WHO HE WILL
BE, HAVING ELIMINATED BERIA, WILL NOT TRY TO ELIMINATE BERIA'S OPPONENTS.
-COMMUNISTS (SNS CZECHOSLOVAK GUIDANCE NUMBER TEN) YOU HAVE ONLY TWO CHOICES.
AS
YOU CAN AID THE PEOPLE AND SABOTAGE THE REQIME, THUS CROSSING THE "GOLDEN BRIDGE"
TO SAFETY, OR YOU CAN FLËS. THERE IS NO OTHER CHOICE.
-
Co TO THE SECRET POLICS:
YOUR TURN HAS NOW COME. IF ALL THE PEOPLE THAT BERIA PROMOTED AND ALL THE
LOCALNORGANS OF THE HVD IN THE USSR ARE TO BE PURCED, AS IS NOW ANNOUNCED,
DO YOU THINK WILL HAPPEN TO YOUR FOOR MARIONETTES IN THE SATELLITES? YOU HAVE
WHAT
EVEN LESS CHANGS TO SURVIVE THAN THE ORGINARY COMMUNIST. AGAIN,
YOUR PEACE WITH THE PEOPLE OR YOU CAN FLEE.
AGAIN, YOU CAN MAKE
OTHERWISE, YOUR DOCH IS CERTAIN.
NOTE:
AS YOU WILL SEE FROM THE ABOVE, OUR PRESENT LINE (THE INCREASING STRENGTH OF THE
PEOPLE, THE INCREASING WEAKNESS OF THE REGINE) REMAINS INTACT. CZECHOSLOVAK
GUIDANCE NUMBER TEN E ALMOST COMPLETELY INTO THE NEW CIRCUMSTANCES AND MUST NOW
BE IMPLEMENTED. (ITH APPROPRIATE CHANGES FOR HUNGARY AND POLAND) WITH RENEWED
VIGOR.
END MESSAGE
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_264.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
0.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
:
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column: Under each comment a line should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
1.
CIP
TO
2.
C/10
10/Branch 1
ROOM
NO.
10 JUL 19
NO.
DATE
CATE
FWO'D
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
77.
CTB Tom
TuB
15 July 1953 ·
COMMENTS
Thanks- This Suits me
queat. What does
State
think? The
messages are
stronger
than what I thought
State would buy - BUT-
Good-
Tracy.
How was your trip - tets
exchanges early next weeks.
Toy
18-81135-1
3. W OFFICE
FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1950
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_265.jpeg ---
14-00000-
L
SECOET
Security Information
15 July 1953
MEZIONANDUS FOR: DIRECTOR CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
RFIS
-
Balloon Operation
-
4:3475
:
Attached herewith is the story of the balloon operation
and an early report of what happened.
+7
Attachment: a/s
Cord Way
CORD NEVER, JR.
Deputy Chief
7
International Organizations Division
Security Inforn
:
i
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_268.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
-->
3-
:
AT ANY RATE, THE SOVIETS ARE IN A BLIND ALLEY. IF THE MOSCOW BOOT WILL
WHICH EVEN HEAVIER ON THE NECKS OF THE OPPRESSED PEOPLE AND IP MOSCOW'S DEMANDS
UPON THE FRIGHTENED PUPPET GOVERNMENTS OF THE CAPTIVE COUNTRIES WILL BESCOMS MORE
PRESSING, THE RESISTANCE OF THE PEOPLE WILL ONLY GROW: FOR THE PEOPLE WILL NOT
RETURN INTO SUBMISSION. IF THE COMMUNIST REGINES, IN ORDER TO APPEASE THIS
WRATH OF THE PEOPLE, WILL TRI TO BRIDE THEIR SUBJECTS BY PROMISING CONCESSIONS
AS WE HAVE SEEN IN HUNGARY AND IN EASTERN GERMANY, THEY WILL NOT GET ANYWHERE:
FOR THE PEOPLE WILL NOT BE DECEIVED ANYMORE BY PITONY CONCESSIONS.
THE PEOPLE ARE GROWING STRONGER, THE FIRST FLAMES OF REVOLT FLARED OUT IN
CZECHOSLOVAKIA ALD IN EASTERN GERMANY. FROM PILSEN, FROM MORAVSKA OSTRAVA,
FROM BERLIN, DRESDATI AND MAGDEBURG THE ECHO OF THIS REVOLT PEARED THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD AND DEEPLY SHOCK THE ENTIRE SOVIET REALM: THE PEOPLE SHOWED THEIR
STRENGTH.
THE COMMUNIST REGIMES RECOGNIZED THE MENACE AND RECAME APPAID. THEY STARTED
APOLOGIZING, THEY STARTED SKLF-CRITICISING, THEY STARTED GIVING PROMISES. IN
GERMANY THE ANTI-LABOR DECRES HAD TO BE REVOKED. IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA THE
FRIGHTENED GOVERNMENT WAS FORCED TO DESIST FROM APPLYING THE PENAL LAWS CON-
CERNING ASGENTESISH. IN MOSCOW, UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE NEWS OF THE PEOPLES
REVOLT IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA AND GERMANY, THE INTERNAL STRUGGLE ESCAME SHARPER.
BERIA AND HIS ALL-POWERFUL FOLICE FELL AS VICTIMS. YOUR REVOLT HELPED TO
ALTER THE COURSE OF HISTORY: NEW FORCES MADE THEIR APPEARANCE ON THE BATTLS-
FIELD, THE PROPLE WON ITS FIRST MAJOR VICTORY IN ITS FIGHT WITH THE REGIMS.
CZECHS AND SLOVAKS: THE MORE YOUR OPPRESS: RS ARE SHAKEN BY UNCERTAINTY,
THE GREATER IS THE CERTAINTY OF YOUR VICTORY. THE REGIME IS AFRAID OF YOU,
IT KNOWS THAT POWER IS FUNDAMENTALLY ON YOUR SIDE. THIS IS THE TIME WHEN
PEOPLES UNITY, A CORTION AGREEMENT AND A UNITED PURPOSES ARE ABLE TO WIN CON-

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_266.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
13
!
STECIENT
Security Information
FOLLOWING RELEASED LOCALLY TODAY: RELEASE FROY RADIO FREE EUROPE:
EMBARGOED UNTIL 11:30 GITT
-
JULY 14, 1953
MUNICH, JÚLY 14, 1953- THOUSANDS OF HIGH ALTITUEZ BALLOONS CARRYING
PESSAGES OF HOPE TO THE CZECHOSLOVAK, PEOPLE WERE KILLASED ON THE CZECH BORDER
LAST NIGHT BY THE CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM.
CARRIED BY STRONG WINDS AT ALTITUDES UP TO 30,000 KEET, THE BALLOONS WERE
EXPECTED TO REACH AS FAR AS THE INDUSTRIAL CENTER OF COTRAVA ON THE RLISH
BORDER, WITH PILSEN, PRAGUE, MOST AND SOKOLOV AS SPECIAL TARGETS.
L
THE "BALLOON BARRAGE"-- THE SECOND AIMED AT CZEZ SLOVAKIA BY THE CRUSADE
FOR FREEDOM - WILL CONTINUE FOR SEVERAL DAYS. ATE OF MORE THAN 13,000,000
A HOTEL OF MORE THAN 12,000,000
MESSAGES, OR ONE FOR EVERY PERSON IN THE COUNTRY, WELL BE SENT.
CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM LAUNCHED A SIMILAR BARRAGE AT CZECHOSLOVAKIA ON AUGUST
23, 1951, AND ANOTHER AT FOLAND ON AUGUST 28, 1951. HOWEVER, THE PRESENT
OPERATION IS FOUR TIMES AS LARGE AND RELIEVED TO BE THE ENGGEST EVER ATTEMPTED.
AKO
MESSAGES CARRIED BY THE BALLOONS RELEASED LAST NIET AND TODAY WERE C
TOFLE TYPES : A REPRODUCTION OF A NEW ONE-CROWN NOTE, ZEARING A PLEA TO OFPOSS
THE COMMUNIST REGIME; A PAMPHLET EXPLAINING THE RECEPT DEMONSTRATIONS IN
EAST GERMANY AND THE FALL OF SOVIET POLICY CHIEF LATENTI BERIA; AND AF ALUMINUM
CHEN STAMPED WITH THE "FREEDOM BELL" AND THE SLOGAN "EL CZECHS AND SLOVAKS FOR
FREEDOM-ALL THE FREE WORLD FOR THE CZECHS AND SLO7:13." .
THE BALLOONS USED IN THE OPERATION CALLED "WINDS OF 7228DOM" ARE OF PHO
TYPES, A RUBBER SPHERE WHICH EXPLODES AT HIGH ALTITUDES, SCATTERING ITS
PESSAGES OVER A WIDE AREA, AND A PLASTIC BALLOON WHICH DESCENDS ON THIS TARGIST.
BOTH TYPES ARE FILLED WITH HYDROGEN.
THE FULL TEXT OF THE MESSAGE PRINTED ON THE ONE COLY NOTE FOLLOWS:
ON ONE SIDE
CZECHOSLOVAKS, KNOW THIS; THE REGIME IS WEAKER THAN YOU HAVE DARED TO
TEENE; POWER LIES WITH THE PEOPLE AND THE PEOPLE STAND OPPOSED. WITH UNITY

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_262.jpeg ---
14-00000
V
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
6. THE PEACE OFFENSIVE WILL PROBABLY CONTINUE ON THE INTERNATIONAL SCENE
BUT WILL HAVE HOW A FURELY PROPAGANDA CHARACTER; NO CENTER CONCESSIONS (E. G.,
SURRENDERING OF FAST GITIMANY) WILL NOW TAKE PLACE. ON THE INTERNAL SCENE IN
THE SOVIET SPHERE THERE WILL CONTINUE TO BE TALK OF IMPROVING THE LIVING STAN
DARDS OF THE WORKERS BUT IN ACTUALITY THE COURSE WILL BE WARD INCREASED
CAPITAL INVESTMENT AT THE EXPENSE OF CONSUMER GOODS-PARTICULARLY IN THE SA TEL-
LITES.
II. GUIDANCE:
CAUTION: AS DEFORE, WE SPECULATE ON FUTURS DEVELOPMENTS IN THE KREMLIN AND THE
SATELLITE COUNTRIES BUT WE DO NOT ACCEPT ANY ONE PAREICHEAR THEAY.
THE END OF THE FIRST ACT OF THE FORMER STRUGGIE FOR THE SOOCESSION, BUT ONLY THE
THIS IS
FIRST ACT; THERE ARE MANY NORK AND BLOODIER ACES TO COME. THE COALITION WHICH
DESTROYED BERIA IS JUST AS SUBJECT TO INTERNAL DISSENSION AS WAS THE MALENKOV-
BERIA-MOLOTOV COALITION FORMED AFTER THE DEATH OF STALIN. THE BASIC ANALOGY
HERE IS TO STALIN'S TACTICS AFTER THE DEATH OF LEMIN. FIRET HE ELIMINATED
TRUTSKY AND THE LEFTISTS (THE NEW COALITION NOW ELIMINASERRIA); THEN HE
ELIMINATED THE RIGHTISTS (PROBABLY THE NEXT ACT IN THIS PRESENT DRAMA WILL IN-
VOLVE ELIMINATION OF THE REST OF THE COALITION BY THE FACING ELEMENT IN IT).
A. TO THE PEOPLE:
;
AS THE BOLSHEVIKS DEVOUR EACH OTHER EVER MORE PROCHUISLY, OUR PEOPLES CAN
LOOK ON WITH PLEASURE AND ASSURANCE WHILE THEIR OPPRESSORS ARE LAKING THEMSELVES
WEAKER AND THEY (THE EASTERN EU OPEAN PEOPLES) ARE RECOATING STRONGER.
KREMLIN IS WEAKENED BY DISSERSION THE SATELLITE KREMLINS ARE EVER MORE WEAK
WHEN THE
AND PARALYZED. AND OF COURSE THE PURGE HAS JUST ELGAN. LOCAL SATELLITE COM-
MUNIST HIG SHOTS WILL BE TOO OCCUPIED WITH SAVING THEIR OWN SKINS TO BE AS
TYRANNICAL AS BEFORE. THIS COULD NOT COME AT A BETERE FOR THE PEASANTS
AND WORKERS OF EASTERN EUROPE: AFTER EASTERN GERMAN RETOATS AND CZECHOSLOVAK
DEMONSTA TIONS, THEY NOW KNOW THEIR OWN STRENGTH AND THEIR ON POWER.
ARE WARSHALLING THEIR FORCES, THEIR TYRANTS STRUCTURE OF CONTROL IS CRACKING.
AS THEY
THE EVENTUAL DOOM OF COMMUNISM WAS NEVER MORE CERTAIN THE BON.
CERTAINLY TRY, AS THE KREMLIN IS TRYING, TO PRESENT A FACADE OF "HONOLITHIC
THE REGIMES WILL
UNITY." BUT YOU KNOW, AS THEY KNOW, THAT THE FACADE IS HOLLOW AND THAT THE
REGIMES, CONFUSED AND RENT WITH INTERNAL DISSENSION, WILL PROBABLY NOT BE ABLE
TO UNDERTAKE ANY ONE CLEAR AND DECISIVE POLICH.
PEOPLE THAT THIS SHIFT TO EXTREMISH WAY MEAN (IN HUNGARY IN PARTICULAR) THAT
HOWEVER, BE SHOULD WARN THE
THE KREMLIN WILL ORDER ITS PUPPETS TO TAKE A MORE EXTREME COURSE THAN BEFORE
(BUT HERE ALSO WE MUST WAIT AND SEE CONFUSION NOW HAI GRAS EVERYWHERE).
THE TIME, IN THIS PERIOD OF CONFUSION, FOR THE PEOPLE THE THE GAINS THEY
NOW IS
HAVE ALREADY MADE AND PRESS ON FOR MORE.
MORE THAN EVERY ACTORS ON THE STAGE RATHER THAN SPECTATORS IN THE AUDIENCE.
IN AVERY REAL SENSE, THE PEOPLE RE
LED BY YOUR NEW LEADERS, YOU THE PROPLE, MUST CONTINUE YOUR EFFORTS IN THE COL-
LECTIVE FARMS AND IN THE TRADE UNIONS, IN THE WAYS YOU KNOW SO WELL, TO FORCE
THE REGIME TO MAKE ACTUAL CONCESSIONS TO YOU.
i
i
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_27.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
d. NCFE then informs this division of progress bring
made and supposedly requests authority to depart from such
completed policy papers.
To date two such policy directives have been written.
The first: was a plan for the reorganization of the Rumanian
National Council. It was submitted to NCFE, and their
criticisms and suggestions have been incorporated. The
plan is now being oxecuted.
The second was a similar State Department-CIA paper on
the reorganization of the bulgarian Hational Committee.
This will be submitted to NCFE on Thursday, 10 July, and a
similar course of action will be followed.
4. I realize that this will seem to you as a somewhat simple
and obvious way of insuring coordination, but the fact is that it
had never been done before. I hope that it results inas few flaps
as possible and as few occasions when people are running off in all.
directions.
5. A current case where people are running off in all
directions is the Folish situation. This broke at the very time
wo were beginning work on a coordinated CIA-State-NCFE paper. NCFE
has been operating upon the assumption that if a Polish National
Council is to be formed, all groups are to be represented. Unknown
to NCFE, and in fact to mo, EE Division has been making attempts
to unify two of the three main groups by holding conversations
with representatives in London. There are a good many chargea
and counter-charges flying about at present on this situation.
man abroad is saying he had informed NCFE of what he intended to do,
and people in NCFE say he hadn't. We are trying to straighten it
out, but the situation is illustrative of how the plan above
outlined can prevent such flaps.
Tho

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_270.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
r
:
SECRET
Security Information
The following was received from Conder, Munich
Have report early afternoon that Czech fighter plane attempting
shoot down balloons. In only instance so far reported, planes shot down
two out of ten that were in air at moment. Also have report that attempts
being made shoot balloons down from ground, but no success. This shooting
occurred at 1410 local time, which is only report so far. Will inform you
of my developments.
I
SECRET
;
.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_267.jpeg ---
14-00000
:;
:
SECRIST
Security Information
- 2
AND COURAGE, ORGANIZE YOUR STRENGTH: DOWN WITH THE COLLECTIVE®
WORKERS' RIGHTS TODAY, DEMAND CONCESSIONS; TOMORROW
INSIST ON
-
FREEDOM
ON THE OTHER SIDE
.
:
-
GIFT OF THE SOVIET UNICH.
OVIE
IT IS THE
MEN CALL. THIS THE HUNGER CROWN
SYMBOL OF REGIME DESPERATION, OF FIVE-YEAR FAILURE: IT IS A CHALLENGE TO
FIGHT, TO MEET WELLNESS WITH STRENGTH, TO RESIST AS YOU KNOW BEST. THE
OTHER CAPTIVE PEOPLES ARK UNITING AND WILL JOIN YOU IN YOUR STRUGGLE.
FREE WORLD IS WITH YOU' ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE'
THE
THE FULL TEXT OF THE PAMPHLET ABOUT EVENTS IN EAST GERMANY: CZECHS AND SLOVAKS'
HEAR THE MESSAGE WHICH COMES TO YOU TODAY FROM THE FREE WORLD:
THE SOVIET UNION 3: GETTING WRAKER' THE PEOPLES OF THE CAPTIVE COUNTRIES ARE
CETTING STRONGER THE SOVIET UNION IS GETTING WEAKER. THE STRUGGLE FOR STALIN'S
HERITAGE SHAKES THE ENTIRE SOVIET EMPIRE AND FEAR HAS CREPT INTO THE KREMLIN.
WHO WILL FALL WITH BERIA AND WHO WILL FALL AFTER BERIA?
FALL VICTIMS TO THE NEW PURGE WHICH IS NOW GOING TO BEGIN
WHICH THE SOVIET UNION HAS EVER KNOWN?
HOW MANY MILLIONS WILL
-
THE BIGGEST PURGE
HOW MANY VICTIVE MYLL FALL IN THE SOVIET UNION AND HOW MANY IN THE OCCUPIED
COUNTRIES? WHO WILL FALL WITH DERIA IN PRAGUE AND WHO WILL. DE DRAGGED DOWN BY
HIS FALL IN BRATISLAVA? WHO WILL BE THS NEW SLANSKY AND WHO THE NEW CLEMENTIS?
AND WHEN THE PURCE SPREADS AND BROADENS, DOWN FROM THE POLITEUREAU TO THE LANDS
AND DISTRICTS, TO THE OFFICES AND THE FACTORIES HOW MANY FUNCTIONARIES WILL
-
SAFELY SURVIVE?
ONLY THOSE WILL SURVIVE WHO WILL DETACH THEMSELVES FROM THE SINKING COMUNIST
BOAT IN TIME. ONLY THOSE WHO JOIN THE FEOPLE AND HELP IN ITS STRUGGLE AGAINST
THE OPPRESSORS.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_269.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
-
4
CESSIONS. YOUR BATTLEFIELD IS IN THE FACTORIES AND IN THE FIELDS. ON THIS
BATTLEFIED OF LABOR YOU HAVE THE ADVANTAGE OF NUMBERS. ON THIS BATTLEFIELD
YOU WILL NOT BE CONTENT WITH PROMISES, YOU WILL
YOU CANNOT BE VANQUISHED
ASK FOR DEEDS. YOU WILL NOT BE CONTENT WITH BRIBES, YOU WILL ASK MORE AND
MORE FROM THE EXPLOITERS. WE DO NOT PRESUME TO GIVE YOU ORDERS HOW TO GIVE
YOU ADVICES. YOU AND YOUR NEW LEADERS WHO-ARE-BEING BORN IN THE STRUCOLE KNOW
BEST NOW AND WHERE TO STRIKE. BUT WE WANT YOU TO KNOW THAT YOU ARE NOT ALONE:
AMONG THE MASSES OF PEOPLE BEHTED THE IRON CURTAIN THE FIRE OF REVOLT IS
SHOULDERING AND ITS SPARKS ARE FLYING FROM COUNTRY TO COUNTRY. EVERYWHERE IN
THE FREE WORLD. YOUR FRIENDS ARE WITH YOU. THEIR HELP WILL GROW AS YOUR
DETERMINATION GROWS.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_271.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Secret
Security Information
The following received from Condon, Munich
i
:
Following is full story as of 1700 local time on shooting. At
1400 two possibly three jet aircraft, presumably MIG, which kept well
within Czech territory, managed after considerable moving to shoot
down two repeat two balloons. Aircraft departed area and have not re-
turned since. Small armz fire during most of afternoon accounted for
total of three repeat three balloons. Small arms fire effective only
during periods when weather conditions did not permit rapid rise of
d.
balloons crossing border at height within range of submarine guns and
carbines.
ts.
Walker's report
→
Temper of residence in launching area calm and
unworried.
End of Message
1
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_272.jpeg ---
14-00000
i₁
:
SECRET
Security Information
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, IO
EB/Czechoslovakia
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Bohumil HOUSER
8 July 1953.
"
1. Reference is made to a letter dated 25 June 1953 and addressed
to you from Mr. Leo M. Chorne, Executive Director of the Research Insti-
tute of America, forwarding certain proposals sent to the latter by Mr.
Bohumil HOUSER of the International Rescue Committee, Camp Valka, Nuern-
berg, Germany. This memorandum will summarize for you our knowledge of
Subject, and our present interest in his activities.
2. Subject was born 1 March 1922 in Bratislava, Czechoslovakia.
He reportedly fought, in the underground in World War II and was taken
prisoner. From the end of the war until December 1945 he was employed
as interpreter to the U.S. military unit in Falknov, Czechoslovakia, and
in 1949 he was head of the porsonnel department of the Brown Coal Mining
Company in Falknov.
3. According to a report from the British Army of the Rhine, he was
recruited by the Czechoslovak Intelligence Service in 1946 in Cheb, Czecho-
slovakia, and is an ardent Communist. According to the CIC, he travelled
to Belgium shortly after the war, and then returned to Germany (sic).
4. We do not know exactly when Subject left Czechoslovakia. Ho
Beams to have emigrated to Australia in 1949 or 1950, and to have returned
to Germany some time prior to September 1951, when he became associated
with the American Fund for Czech Refugees and with the International Resous
Committee. According to one informant, Subject was deported from Australia
for Communist Party activities.
!
5. On 14 April 1953 Subject sent Mr. Cherne an operational proposal.
of such interest that, in spite of the unfavorable information on Subject,
ve felt obliged to investigate it further. Upon our instructions, an agent
of the Munich Operations Base contacted Subject on or about 25 June, using
air force cover, and obtained the identity of Subject's lead. This person
turned out to be an individual who has been suspected since 1949 of being
an agent of the Czech Intelligence Service, and who has very recently
been crossing lines with one or two operations being run by Berlin Opera-
tions Base. Under the circumstances it appears very likely that Subject's
lead amounts to nothing more than a provocation or fabrication. We are
still waiting for an appraisal and recomendations from the field.
Sunti
Security Information
RICHARD A. FINNEY
i
15

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_274.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
Secuie
Memorandum for the Record
Subject:
!
Conversation with Congressman Kersten
18010-4559
7 July 1953
1. On 6 May Congressman Kersten addressed a letter to the
State Department, enclosing a letter dated 6 May 1953, which he had
received from Mr. Creighton Scott, a former employee of Radio Free
Europe at Munich, Germany. This letter was highly critical of cer-
tain personnel in RFE, particularly as regards allegations of pro-com-
munist attitudes. On 6 July I discussed these criticisms with Congress-
man Kersten in detail, conveying to him orally the material contained
in the memorandum of 17 June 1953 from the Director of Security; Subject:
Inquiry by Congressman Keraten; which the Director of Security had noted
should be utilized in this meeting with Congressman Kersten,
2. The Congressman noted the difficulty in evaluating the type of
criticisms which Mr. Scott had made but appeared willing to accept our
explanation.
3. Congressman Rersten then turned to certain criticisins which
he had heard expressed regarding RFE from several sources, including
Scott. One such criticism is that RFE is no doing the best it should on
religious programs. He feels that this aspect of the broadcasts could
probably be considerably strengthened, particularly among Catholic
elements.
4. Mr. Kersten cited the opinion of Count Tarnowski (sp. ?), a well
known Pole, who told the Congressman that any fourteen year old Soviet
citizen would be so well briefed on Soviet philosophy as to turn up their
noses at the RFF material. The Count (and Kersten appears to agree)
feels that the Soviet population has more sophisticated philosophical
material thrown at them by their own Government, and that it should be an
important function of RFE to counter with an attempt to destroy the Soviet
philɔsəphical material and shake the Soviet faith in their theoreticians.
4
5. Congressman Kersten realized that it is difficult to capture
wide audience with philosophical arguments, but he feels that if these
arguments reached a segment of important leaders behind the Iron Curtain,
it would help to destroy and counter the philosophical teachings of Marx,
Lenin, et al. The Congressmen feels that many of our broadcasts deal
with econòmic matters, and, while these are important, RFE should go
CONF
Secre
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_273.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
4-3207
7 July 1953
Noted by
201
1-7/138
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR, CENTRAL INTELLIGICE AGENCY
SUBJECT:
Proposed Balloon Operation
i
:
1. The following menuage was received from Witney Shepardson
on the proposed balloon operation.
Shepardson telked at length with Conant yesterday, Monday.
Conant did not object to the proposed hallcon operation, but
on the contrary "endorses" the project, but said he could hot
"request" acquiescence. Thun Shepardson pays we have "ingroved
upon our miniman expectations".
Shepardson says further that Adenauer has been away sinke
last Saturday but that Lentz and Hallstein were to have returned
last night and 1000 is trying to arrange an appointment with:
either or both for today, Tuesday.
Shepardson will send further word after these talks.
!
173
i
i
Cool Mayer for for
THOMAS
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_275.jpeg ---
14-00000
CO
Scor
desper and hit harder on religion and philosophy.
6. While Congressman Kersten is aware that many of the
captive population are not interested in rightest movements, it is
his opinion that RFE cannot beat communism with socialism. In
particular, he felt (and Scott bore this out in their conversation)
that we were making too much use of Czech socialista, and we were
using socialists from the Bence Government which had sought to
compromise with the communists. While he recognizes the popu̟-
larity of Benes and Masaryk in Czechia, he feels they are not ef-
fective in Slovakia, where there is a heavy Catholic population.
7. Congressman Kersten plans to go to Europe, probably
in September. While he did not say so, I believe he would welcome
an invitation to visit RFE, Munich. Furthermore, as the author of
the Kersten Amendment and of several resolutions on the enslaved
peoples, at least one of which may receive Congressional approval
at this session, consideration might be given as to whether it would
be advisable to request the Congressman to utilize RFE facilities
to broadcast while he is abroad.
:
OGC/WLP:jps
the
Walter L.. Pforzheimer
Legislative Counsel
Jih. Kirkpatrick pavr
22.
original
2-7:
2:
BC-1, the road it and
i
Fock a copy for
NCFE
__
CON
}
S

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_277.jpeg ---
}
14-00000
:
SIC
INFORMATION
1 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECY:
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Comments on Arthur Page's letter of 29 June 1953
1. I think a budget presentation before a mixed audiance of PAC
members and directors or members of the Executive Committee of NCFE
plus expposedly members of the MCF7 staff would be extremely confusing,
whether it were hold here or in New York. Not all the marbers of the
PRC have detailed knowledge of NCFE operations and most of the morbers
of the Executive Committee do not have such knowledge. I see a meeting
such as Arthur Page suggests going about as follows:
duras
B. IO Division presents the budget with cuts which we plan
to recommend.
b.
cuta.
Members of the Executive Committee of NCFE oppose the
C. PRC is placed in a position of turning down its own
staff before the assembled outsiders with whom the staff is
working.
2. I should suggest instead that we follow the following proce-
8. IO Division presents the budget with the suggested cuts
in same.
b. PRC considers these cuts carefully.
-
PRC calls in axport members of the staff of NCFE, 1.0.
Spencer Phanix, Bob Lang, Bernie Yarrow etc., if it desires to
do so, and questions them on any matter within their respective
responsibilities and in particular about the suggested cuta.
d. The exports leave the room.
PRC rakes up its mind whether to accept the cut proposed
or to make bigger cuts, or to add to the budget, as it may desire
to do.
STONET
SECURITY INFORMATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_276.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
NATION
3 July 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELI
INTELLIGENC
SUBJECT:
D'Arcy Brophy and Louis Hovins' Trip to Europe
1. Mr. Brophy and Mr. Novins tell me that you have agreed
to pay their expenses for their trip to Eure. I told them that
since they were traveling on our business they should draw tha
money from Heritage Foundation funds which have been made available.
2. I think this is the tidiest way of handling the transaction.
Novina gave me some representations that it would be better to
channel funds for the trip through one of his clients, Paramount
Pictures. This seems to me complicated and insecure, and I recommend
that if this subject is raised with you directly, you again sugjest
use of Heritage funds.
CIO:TWB/eh
Orig
1 cc
1 ce
1 cc
-
->
Addressee
10/Br I
- CIO
->
RI
BRADEN
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Catal
International Organizations Division
SPEEFT
7

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_279.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUN FOR:
SUBJECT:
JUN 30 1953
CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL CEMANIZATIONS DIVISION
Funds for Balloon Operation
This will authorise you to inform officials of TITONIC
that the restrictions imposed by the Project Review Commdttee,
at its mooting on 29 May 1953 of $3,000,000 for operating expenses
of TPTONIC for the first quarter of fiscal year 1954, may be
exceeded by the funds necessary to prepare and/or executo
balloon operation.
IO/BrI: WPD/sh
(30 June 1953)
Addressee
Orig & 1
1 00
-
->
Finance
1 oc
-
Budget
1 co
100
100
1 co
-
IO/AD
CIO✓
RI
- DCI
->>
-
131 AW. Dulles
aw.
ALLEN W. DULLES
Director
SECRET
RMATION
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_278.jpeg ---
14-00000
-2-
3. It would be useful to brief the Executive Committee on
the reasons why any changes in the budget are made after they are
mado and it might be well to have a lunchoon with the Executive
Committed down here or in New York after the action has been taken
and have the Director explain the reasons why PRO did this or thats
for agency
action
4. I suggest that you write Arthur Page saying that you think
a meeting such an Phenix suggests would confuse our procedures but
that you do think a later-monting with the Executivo Comitico to
explain the actions taken and have a meeting of minds for the work
ahead after the budget has been passed would be useful.
luncheon here
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
"
!
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_28.jpeg ---
14-00000
28 November 1952
MENORANDUM PORT
SUBJECTI
HFFERENCE:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
Proposed Vialt by Robert Lang with officials or cia
FYZS ONLY Memorandum to CF from Klonard Helms,
Acting Chief, Operations, DD/F, dated 25 Nov. 1952
1. Aftor consultation dta Nr. Dirkee, I would like to make tho
following comments on Mr. Heims' masorandum. Mr. Moins is correct that
Mr. Lang has had difficulty in dealing with CIA. Mr. Halms in alao
correct if he understood that tile state of affairs is the responsibility
of Admiral Miller. (To Adiral Miller's responsibility must be added
that of Spencer Phonix, Vice-Proddent and Treasurer.)
2. within and outside NOW, Admiral Milior's Coalings with Mr. Lang
are based on two attitude si
Q. Miller's desire to have control of his organisation by
having everything channeled through him; and
b. Miller's desire to maintain an autonomous organization
which will accept over-all policy guidance from the highest
levels of the government, but which will not allow either doni-
nation by, or close contact with, CIA in order to discuss that
organisation's problems or to be informed of its vahemently
disordered activities.
In this connection, a statement by Admiral Miller in a letter.
to Mr. Alan Valentine, until recently President of the Committee for
Free Asia, is of interesti
1 August 1952
"It was good to see you, if just for an instant, in Washington.
"For your private ear, I might tell you that we won our battle
handa down. Merely to confirm this, our Executive Board is having
lunch in Washington with Allen and Padell naxt, Monday. This will
be a general talk, but I am sure that policies will come up for
discussion. Happily, everything seems to be sailing along in good
shape."
1
-
:
2

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_280.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
:
JUN 29 163
MEMORANDUM FOR: C/PP
SUBJECT:
1.
Recent Developments in the Rumanian Refurco
Situation
In a verbal report to the Rumanian National Comaltten upon
his return from a trip to Hurone to secure former King Michael's
approval of a proposed refugee committee, Hr. Visolanu stated that
thô Kẵng đid not reject the proposal advanced for the reorganization
and enlargement of the present Committed, although he indicated no
interest in having the plan sut into effect immediately. This infor-
mation on the attitude of the King is contrary to that previously.
reported by a member of the Rusanian National Committee, who stated
that the King had finally rejected the proposal upon the recommendation
of his ADC, letro-liar.
2. In his last conversation with Mr. Visoianu, the King requested
that the mealers of the present Rummarian National Committee should send
him, either jointly or individually, their opinions in writing about
the following points,
3. On what grounds does tho Rusarian National Courttes
consider that it cannot continue in its present form?
b. What are the criteria for choosing the members of the
new committee and who are the persons who should belong to it?
C. Who are the Russian exiles and Rumanian organizations
in exile which could be consulted by the King to advise him in
the matter of forming a new National Committee?
3. The Rumanian National Committee members plan to send a joint
resolution to the king requesting that he entrust Viscian with the
formation of a new committed to se comprised of members whose names
were submitted to the King. Should Nichnal refuse this request, the
Committee intends to tender its real nation.
4. Visofanu reported that he had einversations in Paris with
Gafencu, Cherna Veniamin and Interface, to whom he rosed membership
in the new comfittee. At that time, which was before the death of
General Kadescu, (afency refused because of the acclusion of the General
in the new organization. Since Visoiamu was unable to return to Paris
after his conversations with the King, a meeting with unfencu subsequent
to Radescu's death has not been possible. Gherman did not refuse to
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_285.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
FT
Information
30 January 1953
MEMORANDUM PORT CHINP, INTERNATIONAL, ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION
SUBJECT:
Telephone Conversation with Jeane McKnight,
Department of State
1. Mr. Mcknight called to report that Mr. Herbert Plorce from
the UN Public Affairs office is very disturbed about the conduct
of "some RFE man" in New York, who is approaching members of the
US Hission to the United Nations and asking them all sorts of ques-
tions, for example, their views on the recent Doctors' Trial.
2. Mr. Mcknight feels that this practice should be discontinued,
especially in view of the fact that the new metbere of the US Mission
are not yet fully informed about, er sympathetic, to FF. He feels
that any questions concerning US policy on particular issues should
be cleared with Hr. Kretzman, the VOA Policy Chief in New York.
3. I think this matter, ought to be discussed with Deb tang.
Would you let me know whether you will take it up with him, or
whether you wish me to do so.
You do so.
jlurs
SECRET
Security Information
ELLEN STRRN
10/TOHIC

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_281.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
:
become a member of the new committee, but wished to be accepted as
a representative of the Socialist Party. This would be difficult
because of Cherman's affiliation with the left-wing faction which
seceded from Fetrescu's Farty in 1946, subsequently joining with the
Communist Party. Antoniado and Veniamin have agreed to become members
of the new committee.
.
5. In a letter to the Fund on 26 May 1953, Gaſencu stated that
an attempt should be made to give support to a new committee through a
large national council in order to establish unity of the leaders and
of the Rumanian colony abroad. He said that on the day of General
Radescu's death he had received a letter from the General asking him
to take over "his task" to assure the unity of the Rumanians abroad.
Gafencu also wrote that friends in Paris and abroad had asked him to
take over the leadership of a small "ad hoc" committee with the support
of all the Associations of Free Rumanians, which he stated he will do
if the New York group assures him of their support. After that, he
indicated he would see if there would be a possibility of an understanding
with the Visoianu group..
-
6. Prince Hicholas reports that he has been approached by Gafencu
with a request that he join forces with Gafencu to form a new Rumanian
refugee committee under Gafencu's leadership and with headquarters in
France. A committee embracing such individuals as Nicholas and General.
Ion Gheorghe, whom Gafencu also reportedly approached, would not be
acceptable to segments of the Rumanian refugee colony because Micholas
is not on good terms with the king and has had Iron Quard associations,
as does Gheorghe.
7. It would appear that there is little reason to believe that
the Rumanian refugees will set aside their factional differences and
personal ambitions to form a representative committee at this time.
CHRISTIAN M. FREER
Acting Chief, SE
$
i
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_282.jpeg ---
14/00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
25 June 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION
RFE Coverage of Stockholm ICPT Congress
SUBJECT:
1..
At our request RFE is going to give full coverage
to the ICFTU Meeting in Stockholm. It has arranged to have
the menting covered by three desks, The Hungarians are
using a Stockholm stringer, while the Poles and Czechs are
each sending editors. In addition, there will be overall
coverage to the central neweroom by RPE'e information corres-
pondent, Dreifuss. Messages from the labor leaders of thn
free world will be broadcast to the Czech people, in line
with our recent guidance.
2. A copy of the UN Slave Labor Report was delivered to
the boat of Col. Mullany's friend yesterday afternoon prior
to departure.
SECRET
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
Chief, IU/Branch 1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_283.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
UNCLASSIFIED
TO
-
21
RESTRICTI
CONFIDENTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
Miss Tisthammer
C/10
5
FROM
-
2.
CIO
q/Det
3
SECRET
INITIALS
DATE
INITIALS
DATE
6/30
APPROVAL
ACTION
INFORMATION
_ SIGNATURE
DIRECT REPLY
☐ RETURN
COMMENT
PREPARATION OF REPLY
DISPATCH
CONCURRENCE
RECOMMENDATION
Remarks:
Alice:
Please insure that Mr. Dulles sees his
before the NCFE people come in, and that they
don't get their hands on it. TB
SECRET
FORMING
SEP 1947 30-4
TWB
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
UNCLASSIFIED
10-63345-1
.. GOVERN PRINTING OFFICE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_284.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
16
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
23 June 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Your Meeting with NCFE with afternoon.
4.2858
According to my informants (I have not talked to Arthur Page),
the Executive Committee of NCFE made two decisions at its meeting
yesterday:
1. That the performance of RFE in the recent difficulty wag
like that of a divisional commander who refuses to obey the corps
plan, and
2. That NFE should immediately devise procedures so that future
guidances from CIA will be put into effect without the two-week delay
caused by Lang's refusal.
3. As I understand it, however, it is a fact that the guidance
is not yet fully in effect and that the action part of the guidance,
that is to say, paragraph 4, of the instructions of the Executive
Committee to Radio Free Europe (you have a copy on your deck), has
not yet been put into effect. I am guessing that you will get a lot
of talk this evening about how most of this has been done before and
is already standard operating procedure etc. etc. etc.
4. If you want to take a firm line this evening, I suggest
that you stick to trying to find the answers to two questions:
3.
Is the guidance initiated by you and passed upon by
the Executive Committee fully in effect?
b. Have any steps been taken to make sure that in the
future guidances will be put into effect?
t
TWB.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
i
;
1
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_287.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
1
...
2
:
23 April 1953
MSMOELINUM PORT SECURITY OFFICER, CIA
SUBJECT:
Leland Stowe
1. Pursuant to my conversation with Mr. Hamby, I
have talked with the Director of PV? and he has agreed to
terminate subject's present job.
8.
He intends to bring subject to New York and make
him his personal consultant in the New York offico. Ho
assured me of his full intentions to carry out this plan
and further assures me that he has no intention of giving
subject scednistrative or operational autority of any kind.
3. Is this arrangement satisfactory to you?
CIO:3/h
THEM W. BRADEN
CHIFF
International Organisations Division
Orig & 1
->
1 cc
-
Addresses
10/Br I
1 cc.
1 cc
100
-
10/Security Officer
-
CIO
RI

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_29.jpeg ---
j
14-00000

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_288.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
.1
SECURITY INFORMATI
22 April 1953
MEMORANDUM FOILS DEPUTY DIRECTOR (FLANS)
SUBJECT:
Julius Epstein
In response to our request from the Fund, we are forwarding
herewith the general information available concerning Julius
Epstein.
[gned
TIRMAS 4. BRDEN
Chicf
International Organizations Division
Attachmente: (5).
tr. to Helson dtd 1/20/53
Personal biography by Epstein
Excerpt from Congressional
Record for 2/9/52
Booklet by Epstein
Article by Arthur liss Lanc
10/Branch 1:WPD:jb
Distribution:
Addressed
10/Tonic
CIO
->
1cc
RI - 1cc
-
orig 1 via CPP
-
2cc
SPOLET
SECURITY INFORMATION
L

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_286.jpeg ---
14-00000
Leo are
GEGURITY INFORMATION
2 February 1953.
CUDUM FOR THE RECORDS
SUBJECT: Meeting to Discuss State Department Proposals on how to
Counter-Check items on UNGA Agenda.
1. I attended a meeting on Wednesday, 28 January 1953, to discuss
paragrape 6 and 7 of the attached paper propared by the Department of
State. It calls for the establishicent of "a commission of independent
Bezbers to study the nature and extent of this escupen problem, with
the view of determining the reasons and circumstances impalling these
people to escape" and suggests that "this inquiry could follow the
pattern of the commission on forced labor. The Commission would hear
refugees in such places an etern Germany, Genova, etc., and its
eventual report to the assembly would, in fact, be a report on the entire
communist system, the denial of basic human right, etc."
2. Te questions raised in the meeting centered around the possibility
of CIA's intelligence activities being compromised by the investigations
of this commission. It was decided that FI, MEDCAP and the operating
people were the ones competent to make the decision.
3. Mr. Lazarus informed me by telephone on 30 January, that the
above-mentioned individuals had presented him negative answers on the
subject proposal. Their conclusions are being forwarded to the DDP
and subsequently to the Department of State. xr. Lazarus further
stated that any recommendations by 10 would be welcome.
ELLEN STERN
10/TNIC
10/TCHIC: ES/hka
Distributions:
Grig. -Addressee
2 cc -10/TOMIC
-10/10
1 cc -C/10
RI
- Mr. Braden
1 cc
1 cc
1 cc
- Mr. Hand
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
L

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_289.jpeg ---
14-00000
Collège de l'Europe Libre
CHATEAU DE FOURTALES STRASBOURG-ROBERTSAU (Bas-Rhin)
BOITE POSTALE 61. STRASBOURG R. P.
SELEPHONE DIRECTION: 933.09 INTENDANCE: 832.96
ADRESSE TÉLÉGRAPHIQUE: EXILUNIVER STRASBOURG
When
Zm
Pans
Cipril 4-
1953.
L
hould have This
ms to be hogers by les din res
Royale Tyler
Davis nuts mich one
with
Ex. Excente
I hope they be has readin
Frank has bem made aware
of
The 9
m
fermily: Stops, too,
that
hem up
=
;
Live
Ty.
* I
=

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_290.jpeg ---
14-00000
COPY
COFY
April 1, 1953
No. 26 Dear Adolf,
A day or two before I sailed for Europe in January, 1953, I received
a typed manuscript copy of the "Progress Report on the College de l'Europe
Libre", which has now appeared in mimeographed form under date of February
27, 1953, over the signatures of Royall Tyler and Richard Sears.
I admit to considerable curiosity when this document appeared. In
the covering letter Royall Tyler morely stated, "It comes from Dick Sears".
I rather wondered why this report should be compiled when it was known I was
coming to Europe presumably to examine into conditions and it seemed to me
immediately that this might be a counter foil to what it was expected I
would find. In reply to a direct inquiry from me, Sears now states it was
· prepared "to reinforce the German language un project by supplying informa-
tion that, was apparently lacking.
At the risk of indicating an overly suspicious temperament, which is
not characteristic of me, I feel that this report over-simplifies a complex
situation It embodies a point of view that the operation at Strasbourg
is proceeding smoothly and successfully, hich it is not. It assumes that a
paper plan (for the National Seminars) is in full and healthy bloom, which is
not the case. I have stated so frequently (almost ad nauseam) that you must
live in this frustrating atmosphere for a while before you can understand what
conditions are. Reyall Tyler and Sears have never had that experience and
formed their opinions from what they have been told by Davis, Galy, Straka,
and Donzelot. The latter in turn was constantly fed information by Galy and
Straka, and altogether has spent only three or four days on the ground. He
has had numerous talks in Paris with Galy and some of the tutors.
-
So, while the factual material in this report can not be questioned
I mean the statistics and the historical portions the interpretation of
them does not reflect the disappointing results. This pertains to the work
of the Committee on Awards on the one hand and the actual operation at Robertsau
on the other.
When I asked Sears how widely this report had been distributed he told
me "to the Trustees of FEUE, to the members of the Association du College

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_291.jpeg ---
14-00000
COPY.
:
Dr. Berle
Page 2 of No. 26
·April 1, 1953
de l'Europe Libre and to resurs. Thomas Braden, Jolin C. Hughes, C. D. Jackson
and Whitney H!. Shepardson".. I assume, therefore, that the members of our
Executive Committee, to whom I am sending copies of this letter, have received
it.
The sentence (bottom of Page 9 and going over to top of Page 10),
"These were mon of advanced education, expert in their knowledge of their own
countries but also, most of them, having studied in French institutions and so
capable of forming a bond for the students between their training at homo and
in exile.", is not an accurate description of the caliber of the tutors.
On Page 14, second line, I would question definitely the phrase
#woll organized administration". Also on that page, sixth lino, the sentence,
"Special French courses were being given to those who still showed weakness.".
is misleading. Such courses were announced, but the program for teaching the
French language is only now being outlined with the help of the French language
staff at Strasbourg University after a conference with them I called for this
purpose.
On the same page again, fifth line from the bottom, the phrase "the
severity of the action taken in the autumn has had a salutary effect in
imposing firmer discipline and setting higher standards" simply is not so.
The manner in whichthe action was taken, and the inaccuracy of some of the
judgments, whichhad to be reversed, called forth protests from staff and stu-
dents alike and did as much as anything else to cause present low student morale.
On Page 16, the last sentence in the first paragraph roads, "A fresh
start in life combined with exposure to Western thought and practice will, we
are encouraged to hope, produce a full return." Instead of what the statement
implies, the students have witnessed a cleavage between the European staff and
the Americans, and the "exposure to Western though and practice" has been
anything but inspiring or unifying.
-
The distribution of this document can be and will be very misleading
by its implications that success has been achieved to an extent that warrants
our proceeding on our present path. That will be unfortunate. We have acquired
a fund, of valuable experience and we have made mistakes. The net result is tho
present situation. Fundamental changes must be made, which are bound to be
unpleasant, but they are essential, unless we are going to continue a more
charity operation and miss the real purpose of FEUE.
I
LT:ECK
Dr. A. A. Berle, Jr.
70 Pine Street
New York 5, N. Y.
J
Sincerely yours,
Levering Tyson
President

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_294.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR
is
1
Hats
31-8728
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
·UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON
April 3, 1953
My doar Mr. Wisner:
I want you to be informed of the action which I am taking
in regard to international broadcasting facilities in this
country.
I have sent a letter to the companies concerned along the
linos of the enclosed which gives a full explanation.
Sincerely yours,
ofer
Robert L. Nohnson
Administrator
1
Enclosures
Copy of letter to broadcasting
companies terminating contracts.
Mr. Frank Risner,
Central Intelligence Agency.
4/9/53 ce- EA File
INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION AND EDUCATIONAL EXCHANGE PROGRAM
_

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_296.jpeg ---
14-00000
Worn the o
Hogne, rw day, this on
coairneb th Genera
will also be trans
I peronally take the w
thia mandirda do
mrt
rofufblou of tbdy # 37 W ba
lion to be "fforin
exporines of Me Intraaldo
Bogoria mnt.
1 h. chico
a management anatooring Man
}
W i domostic facilitie ned by the
1 +
N
unged my decision peduarily thereon. I hem notar of
and a cell apo en penses
3
competent person in
the operations of the Voice.
bith
The decision to teruuate thyen noutracts le bounken with
full roulication of the policy of Public New 40% rolative to privatel
enterprise in the broadoaking Nei,
centarted to
terciante construction contracta for vo negi Govor it.
Ming stations in this country.
This present action to not intended to prejudice a confus
inconsed participation or a pen in intovifonal
broadcasting by thanoliconados. I hell coopto !
Us
This action is thin with parano vgret particulele betajo
you and your Company have vomited in pray way ra»viona në p
vellus to the United States, etc I know who he bega
acqua
dons in a highly patriotic spirit
Sinceraly yono.
141
Robrad L, Jalass
Adminionfor

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_293.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CL
* CONFIDENTIAL
TION TOP AND BOTTOM)
BECRET
10-3-1106
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
10
1
2
INITIALS DATE
Exfic Office, DD/P +
3 PP = 2042
IO-C10
5 RP
FROM: C/10 (retain or destroy
1
Rasia
A 10pil
TWB
Wi
INITIALS DATE
DD/P TO 419653
2
3
☐ APPROVAL
☐ ACTION
☐ COMMENT
☐ CONCURRENCE
REMARKS:
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
Mr. Wisner
☐ SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
☐ FILE
Sitial
this be circulated as
indicatial for information.
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
UNCLASSIFIED
30-4
J
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_295.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
:
f
A CABA
Csail:
Holdersible
that the
ab of
Med
mriortco
hod of
"
cration
We
to
Mari
of
be dentend on
::
However, fre
3
of 90 5
ement
at
sday of the recent active of the
possible ecomandatory pateko pozaty
over steps are say to the Tres tong
obligated for facilition or ice ich 4 not b
I 1v 11
nooded,
our
It is by christy, in to protect the
give at this time 90 day to off
of three contracts to work by throw
continuing into the flour.
1 2 th 16 16
due to you. Conny d to the our v
aluated
accompany these notless with depresand ration
reasons for them.
Last fall the wander of 17 cunt
r sd,
by the Voice of Prica of of sudlo vratom is
origination in the
in
Maida Sea
10
sang
Win7
mitter capacity. She stood the
condition, considerio de vivo to deoch
cutside the Wutod Scaled me of the po
hera A would n
United Staten.
In my Jinnat, production of th
requirea that s notive
n
Associate froster of for
na
Croclay, ma to the ultion at Mason
who
Concral Electric, co to the int
Bonont, Cali
Westinghouse
World Wide Proadenitaly Corporatach
E
'
!
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_292.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
"
109
....
6 April 1953
MEMORANDUN FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Information reported by Bob Lang, SFN
Bob Lang has had reported to him the following:
1. Epstein, an investigator for Senator NcCarthy, has just
turned into the Senator a 150-page anti-RFE report.
--
2. Lang has received this report from three former RPE
employees. The first two, FAFAGO and TATER, reported to Lang they
were visited by Epstein. They reported this interview to Lang
because Lang, has considerable derogatory information on them. They
do not wish to be identified with any such report. The third
informant is ono DeCASTER, about whom Lang has written you. DEGASTER
which
resigned a job in RFE to come to work presumably for us --
collapsed, and has since been trying to get his RFB job back. Bob
considers his report for that reason to be quite reliable. DeJASTER
wrote a letter to the New York Times, which was published 8 March, in
which he referred to himself as a former employes of RE. Epstein
apparently read the lotter and immediately came to see DeQASTRR.
During their conversation, Epatein referred to a 150-page uncoupli-
montary report he had compiled on HFW.
3.
ACFB says that it has some derogatory information on Epstoin
and it will be forwarded to us.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
10/BrI:WPD-TWB/eh .
Orig - Addressee (thru CPP)
-1 co- IO/BrI
1 cc
->>
1 cc
-
CIO
RI
DUBNATION
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_297.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (FIANS)
SUBJECT:
Agency Channel to MCFE
6 April 1953
1. Now that Larry defenfville is working for NCFE, I know
that there will be a strong dency on the part of all of us to
deal with WCFR through Larry, this not only because he is an able
man but because we all know him so well.
2. If we take this course, however, we shall confuse channels
of communications as between the Agency and NCF by adding to the
normal IC/Branch I (William . Parkes, Chief) channel and to such
*.
informal channels as necessarily exist still another channel. This
would make the job of all of us more difficult and confound our
constant efforts at orderly procedure.
3. I hope that higher authority will bear this in mind.
j
CIOITEB/eh
Orig
-
Addresses (thru CPP)
1 cc - IO/BrI
1 cc - CIO
1 cc - RI
i
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief.
International Organizations Division
;

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Security Information
-
-2.
-
B. We have had various reports which indicate that the
morale of a number of students at Strasbourg is not good. These
morale problems arise from a variety of reasons, among which are:
(1) They are not entirely certain why they are there
and just what the American sponsors intend for them]
(2) They fear that after they finish their education
they will be without jobs;
(3) There has been a steady and systematic campaign
carried on by French Communist students at the University
of Strasbourg to demoralize and disorganize the FEUE student
body. In addition, several students are suspected of being
espionage agents.
4. Dr. Tyson is leaving for Europe on the 21st of January to make
a thorough investigation and evaluation of the Free University in order to
answer these questions. We are aiding him by having the officials of the
President's Escapes Program make available a complete inventory of escapees
who might be potential candidates for the University.
5. Dr. Tyson was not the instigator of the proposals for a gymnasium
for the Free University. The proposals were made and pushed by Royal Tyler
and Spencer Phenix. The handling of this matter as far as Tyler was concerned
was another example of his difficulties in dealing with Phenix for, as finan-
cial officer of NCFE, and having no position in the separate corporation,
that is, the Free University, Phenix has and is dealing with matters of
policy.
Attachments: a/s
IO/TONIC:WFD/cmm
Distribution:
Orig Addressee
-
1 cc
-
1 .cc
1 cc
-
-
THOMAS W. ERADEN,
Chief,
International Organizations Division
CIO
IO/TONIC
RI
SECRET
Security Infation
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_301.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
SECRET
Security Information
2 April 1953
The Director of Central Intelligence
Good news concerning William Heimlich.
DD/P 3048
1. I have just received through Mr. Durken a report from
the RPE people in Munich to the following effect.
2. Mr. Heimlich has visited the promises and talked to
some of the key personnel of RFS-Munich. He was cordially
received and shown around. At the conclusion of his visit,
Mr. Holmlich ntated that whereas he was not primarily or
particularly interested or concerned with NCFE/RPE activities
and operations (presumably meaning that he was more concerned
with the State Department information project
and presumably
He
--
MA), he had been very much impressed by what he had seen.
we eatsfied that this was a hard-hitting operation; that
thero was no "fat" on it; and that ho would so report to the
Senate Committee upon his return.
-
informat
FRANK O. WISHIR
Acting Deputy Director.
* SECRET
Security Information
$

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_298.jpeg ---
14-00000
E
Stal
SECURITY INFORMATION
MENORANDUM PORT
DEPUTY DIRGSZOR (FLANS)
SUBJECT:
CA03067
13-2241
3 April 1953
DEPITY DIRECTOR (ADMINISTRATION)
Request from the NOPE for the release of $150,000 fros
the CIA held reserve for the
1. Mr. Spencer Phenix, on behalf of the NOPE, upon authorisation of
the board of Himcture, has requested the release of (150,000 6 CIA
held reserve for FHUL capital exstruction for the following purposesi
(a) "Alterations to the main building
Installation of a refrigerated cold roon
for the storage of foori
35,600.
Additional automatic kettles and equip-
munt in the kitchen and service rosz
1,700.
Additional office space on the second
Floor
600.
Potal
$7,500.
The original dining room installation
provided for service for a student body
of 100; the increase in enrolment (now
almost 200) has constrated that acre
refrigeration and storage space and equip-
Lent in needed.
Housing the women students in the main
building with resultant changes in the
physical lay-out has meant the readjust-
sent of offion specs and it has proved
possible to provide the new offices on the
seconxi floor for the estimated cost of $600.
(b) Improvements to the furmised house adjoining
the main building and sand as residence by the
Assistant Doan
6,000.
Necessary additional furniture to replace
items removed by lessor and improve living
conditions.
1,200.
Total
$7,200.
SECTET
SECURITY INFORMATION
}
}

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_300.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
-
.30
:
between the various buildings and offices.
$3,000.
(f) Additional furniture required for the "concierge's"
quarters, equipemnt for the kitchen enlarge ent and
additional furnishine for the women's doral tory.
(6) Architect's foes.
Total
$5,500.
$6,000.
I
$135,400.
Savinga era due to a creat simplification in the
architect's proposal for the auditoriiam, the elimination of the
new residence for the Assistant Jean, and possible by the recont
agreement on the part of the owner to permit the Assistant ean
to occupy his present quarters until the termination of the lease
on the catire property inatoal of requiring him to vacate the quarters
this summers the climination for the time being of a proposed scall
apartment building to neconsolate visiting professora and officials;
pout-ponent of certain landscaping expenses and the elimination of a
proponet onlargement of the dining hall now fold to be umecousary since
a limit of 200 has been fixed for next year's anrollment.
In order to no plote nos construction by Aunt 1, 1953, wor
should start not inter than March 15, 1953, and in view of the time
Recessary for the preparation of working plans, opening of bide, and
signature of contracts, it is of the greatest importance that the necessary
funds be made promptly available."
2. The differance between the total of 1135,400 and the $150,000 and for
is a 10% morgin allowance for price increases.
rezervo
3. We recommand, for release from the Child are by the P and the
BD/A, all itens except (a) and the 107 marria allowance, a total of
32, 600 Le
10/Branch 1:WPD:jb
N DRANON
Chief
International Organisations Division
Comptroller
SLOST,
SECURITY INFORMATION
Distributions
Addressec orig & 1 (DD/P)
1 cc
CONCURRENCE 1 06
1 cc
(1
(DC/A)
Comp.
CIO
i co 10/Br. ✓
epith otrrow El(Flens):
N☑
15/2404 WRW
Verity Wirector (Administration)
Reputy
:
I..
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
This letter was writion at a time when the
Division had achieved
for CTA its first detailed budget from NOTE and was further asking a
mutuality of relations between NCFE and CI>, ultimately defined in
Memoranchum of Understanding, dated 24 september, signed by H. B. Millør
and Allen W. Dulles. It proves what at the time we only suspected,
that Hiller was calling on support from Valentino against CIA..
.
3. Mr. Phonix and lang rosont Admiral Miller's tondency for tight
admini otrition. Poth have carried on a campden within NC25 to discredit
Killer. However, Mr. Penix, perhaps Ling, and almost all of tho
responsible officials of HCF back Killer in his attitude towards CA.
for example, despite repeated requests-by / and as recently as thɩroo
wocka ayo by DOCI personally, Millor has refused to turn over to CIA a
list of NCPE employees. Even a request by RCT to John Hugnes has foiled
to produce this list.
"
In addition, Mr. Phonix acts as the Semmen export in NCFE,
cutting out Lang. Poenix alone has negotiated and dealt with Gorman
higa officials on RF's position in Germany, Er. Lang and Pir. Phenix
have fundamental disputes about how AFE' a German problema should bo
handlod. Fart of Mr. Lang's desire for personal talks with officials
of the Department of State grows out of the wich to get backing for
his position.
HPE
4. In a sense, is the last NCFR bestion to be sealad.
Mr. Leng's statement that he has received virtually no guidance, polloy
or otherwise from this organization is largely a play on words.. Mr. Lang
has not sought the guidance of numbers of his own organization, mich lose
the guidance of CIA. when the 10 Division took over responsibility for
NCFF, the CIA intelligence support unit, which cupplied RFT information
and guidance, was abolished on fr. Langle advico that mich information
and puidance were no longer necessary. RFE broadcasting policy is not
down in a handbook which has been thoroughly examined and nocepted by
CIA and from time to time specific guidance has been given to AFP. HFE
accepts any materials and guidance as suggestions; not ordera. We believe
Lang is gotting all the guidance thore is to give, and that he is looking
for the kind of rəh poilcy forecasting wiich does not exist.
5. These are the political facts of life for the 10 Division, and
indend for CIA. The vision has attempted to deal with the situation
by: (1) winning the confidence of the Directors and Division heads of
NCFE, and (2) maintaining friendly personal relationship with both
Admiral Miller and Mr. Spencer Enenix. Much progress has been mado in
gaining knowledge of, and control over, the activities of NOITE.
Aside from friendly dealings, our specific concept of gaining
control over NCFE as a whole, has boon to push and encourage the thought
that NCFE should be operated as a whole. The present separation and
uncoordinated activities of divisions, especially KFE, while perhaps
SECTET
TY INFORMATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_299.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
S.GET
SECURITY INFORMATION
The contemplated alteration involves pri
cipally the installation of central heal
connected with the main heating syster. At
the present the there is no central Mating,
the building is constantly daap in vintertino,
and the attempt to maintain a oatinisetort
temperature with sloves and portable heaters
has proved uncatisfactory. Other impro verwent o
consist of additional kitchen equipment, includ-
ing a gas water poater, a kitchen cabiret, the
construction of a closet, repairs to
is:-
trical gaten and conversion of existing sarage
space into a small dining rom.
(c) Construction of an auditorius for student meetings,
lecturns and recreation activities, cha con
corts, student, theatricals, moving plotires and
the the st. as a andundary feature, facilities
for indour exercise during the vinter months.
Total
$102,500,
The auditorit will have a reinforced cemorete foundation,
outside walls of pine clapboards" (Biler recently
constricted domitory and betere hall) to comprated
fireproof straw natorial for insulsion, a to position
roof of the ease material used on the me derritory
and lecture hall and with win framing of elsel.
Satisfactory. lighting and heating systems are included
and the interior finish will be such as to provide
Batisfactory acustic qualities. Also included in
this building are offices and living quartore for
the "concierge." The architect's estirate shove the
estimated cost of the auditorium insol? (17 meters x
22 notere in size, including 15,000. for steel conts
and $3,000. For safety plans) as 155,000, te diltional
cost of the stage with the "concierge'e accommbcations
above as $19,000, connecting passage between auditorija
and adjoining buldig, 1,300, relocation of library and
alteration of study halls, s1,100, novable seats, slage
and dindow curtains, notion picture equipment ath screen
ec 15
with
and window curtains, motion picture equipment with screen
and athletic equipment, $22,400. (All fires approx.)
(d) gr
(e)
Re-surfacing walks between buildina ratallation of
a for electric lichte at strepoints along the
: walka.
!!
$3,000.
Listallaties and equipment of a central telepicte
suitchboard with necessary wiring and aditional
telephone instruments so is to permit intermentication
1
SECURITY INFORMATION
3i_

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_302.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
2 April 1963
3.6822
ANDIA FOR
DEPUTY SPL (PLANE)
VIA:
Chief, Political and Paye oloical Marfare
:
:
BULJECT
Pointe rained by you in connection with th.
11
conversation with Leland Stone on 1953 and
Whitney Chepaidson on 16 Horch 1953.
The following answers to Mr. Mane's comments on ribject reros
have been prepared by Ir. Burkee:
1. #r. Láng does not intend to put Stowe in official
charge of Hunich operations. My remark was intended to indicate
that apparently with Lang's comment, Mr. Stove is besering in-
creasingly influential in the Munich operation.
Information Service develop, no that it is writion scripts
and programing as he proposes, and if Stone's successions for
dealing with the German problem are followed, he will indeed,,
if given Langis fall support, be the dainant in
Mwich.
1
1641
"The original ice-box' statement was indeed passed on
by us. by reference was to our aproval of on alternabe ice-box'
statement entitled, NOVE Policy Statement', which heterdtion pro-
I have not berile to
poses to use in place of the original.
determine whether this receive our approval and, therefore, on
24 Horch, sent it through channels to the D/P and 2/02 for
their official approval."
-
Themes W. Braden
THOMAS . MADEI
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECTET
SECURIT INTORATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_303.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
!
:
UNCLSIFIED · RESTRICTED
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
.CONFIDENTIAL
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
TO
1
2
3
CIOD
Auvhee
4
5
FROM
2
3
1.
PP/c/
.
SECRET
INITIALS
DATE
INITIALS DATE
26 Ma
☐ APPROVAL
✓
JACTION
COMMENT
_ CONCURRENCE
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
☐ RECOMMENDATION
REMARKS: CPP asks but
a
SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
☐ FILE
you prepare
reply to the two points
raised
by
F.G.W. and sindsame
to F.G.W. via e.pp.
SUSPENSE 2 APRIL
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
30-4
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
UNCLASSIFIED
☐
"
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_305.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
i
NOLANTUM OF
SECRET
Security Information
11.
1953 AT HAY
9:30 F. N 12:15
During the course of our conversation Kr. Stowe stated that he was
pleased to have had the opportunity to meet here and to clear up his status.
He also stated that:
a In his opinion r. Lang is indispensable to the operation
of RF, but that it was necessarg for Hr.bang to be in Munich more.
often. He feels that in spite of Mr. Lang's over-all comprehension
that developments in Munich have out-run Lang's or anyones enpacity
to understand it without closer contact with its day to day operations.
b. He has a high retard for Hr. Richard Condon, whom he feels
is doing an excellent job. It is Stowe's
It is Stowe's opinion that Condon needs
a competent administrative assistant and that Alan Richie, #TE
correspondent in Lonion, could fill such a position. Lang agrees with
him. Stowe feels it remarkable that during his considerable time with
PRE that he has never heard a bad word about Mr. Condon.
C. He has a very high regard, for Hr. Griffith and the role he
plays in RFF's operations, however, it was his feeling that it is
impossible for Mr. Griffith to adequately take care of RFE's outalde
relations in Germany because: (1) Griffith does not have the time and;
(2) He is not particularly effective in dealing with,Germans because
of his youth and rather pedantic namner, He informed me that there
is a possibility of retting Raymond G. Suing for employment with RFE
and that he felt Swing could excellently undertake the job of dealing
with the German government and German public because of Swing's
language facility, his familiarity with Cermany and his prestige.
0. He is recrmanizing the News and Information Service of RFE
because the drying up of escapees has increaser the need for top rank
correspondents with depth of airopean experience and political knowledge,
so that significant ideas and contributions to RFI propaganda can be
developed. He also feals that a reorganized news gathering service
will lead to more effective American Leadership because of the respect the
exiles will have for its American personnel. Such procedures, in his
opinion, are necessary in order to properly integrate the various free
radio desks, their use of information resources and to professionalize
pro ran content. He says he intends to have his News and information
Service prepare scripts to be used by all desks. In addition, Stowe
pointed out a news gathering service of top rank correspondents will allow
him great operational flexibility, for personnel can be interchanged
at will.
SEUSET
Informe

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_306.jpeg ---
14-00000
...
SEOPET
Security Information
-
2
-
Stowe also made a strong plea for Falcon Davis who is
a personal friend.
CONTENTZ:
Stowe is a strong person who in taking over E Munich, apparently
with Langly concent. I suspect Lang rives his concent because he has been
unable to dominate either Griffith or Condon. Lany has presumably hereto-
Tore dealt with this problem by insisting upon .. policy control and by
!
keeping an inordinately large Czech, Polish and gardan progran desk in
New York.
I an are there is merit in many of Stowels observations but suspect
that real trouble in brewing between New York and ich, especially among
exile personnel as this becomes nore a Stowe "American" operation.
William Page
JILLIAH P. DERKEK
Chi, 10/TONIC
7
:
}
3-44
SECRET
Security Information
H

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_304.jpeg ---
14-00000
î
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
2763
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Undor each comment a line should be drawn across sheet
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should intral (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Rouling and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
10/Branch I
DATE
TO
ROOM
NO
A&C'D
1W3'0
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
NO.
DATE
Io-3-841
16 March 1983
CCACIAENTS
2.
Cro
C/PP
"
5.
D/DF
"Mh
7.
8.
0.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1950
4 20
TWB
19
mar COB
26
Toin:
Franklare
Fsh this at frock to t
Mai CTB
of conversation as if Creation
lilb: states much hi
3 to 4 and 5-
WPD
①)) I had not h
befire that Lang pr
jus
to put some in charge In
that Munich gruation.
frever
He hav
lold thus and I
wn
doubt that he would with
•much ~
change unthout letting
er, especially since he in
kewar
caltion in
certain difficult
The Ilove care.
⑤I was distinctly
under the impresions that
(contrary to what Bill D
the bee box statement was resw
and was
Days
AWD.
this. I
Plissa
approved by
Could I be in cont
mygon perces
B. 6. CAT PRINTING OFFICE
SECRET frrow, but I thought you but did.
you 78W

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_307.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
B
K
SECRET
Security Information
SHA
16
AT 9:00 AN
:
1
:
1. Mr. Shopardson said that he had gone ov r Brew Fearren business
with his entire staff and that they had all agreed that a roller of silence
was clearly indicated that this was not a time to relate the #ice-box"
statement which he referred to as "ice-box" statement number 1 and muumber 2.
Shepardson said he would feel out ...Jackson in his ngeting with him today
to determine whether C. P. thought any approach to Pearson should be rade and
whether ha hingelf world be the one to do it. He agreed that such an approach.
to Pearsch should be made by noone else.
2.
then I cueried him about the "ice-bex" statement number 2, he said
he referred to the NONE Feldey Statement fich states the fact of US Government
support. He said that it was his understanding that it had been cleared down
here. I replied that to my knowledge this was not so. I told him all we had
ever had was a draft Statement which had been discussed inforally. He agreed
that if this van in feet the case, he would immediately send the policy
statement for our formal approval.
•
3.
During the course of our conversation he indicated that Abbot
Nashburn had arranged for RFE to appear before the Jackson Committee on Harch
26 and also had arranged for the rest of NCFE to make a prerentation some time
in April. I asked whether. Dulles was informed of this and he said he was
not aware that he was suggested that sono preblen existed here for NOPE is
Mr. Dulles' responsibility and that no-one denied that F/I should make such
a presentation, it was still a fact that such a unilateral presentation night
lead to some difficulties. I therefore suggested that we make a joint presenta-
tion whether written or oral, to which Mr. Shopardson agreed.
h. I discussed the problem of security in F, Nich, and our concern
that a security man competent to deal with questions other than the rare internal
security of PFE be placed in Munich. Shepardson immediately agreed that this
should be done and we agreed that I would prepare a paper for him outlining
what we thought our problems are. In the meantime, Nyers will not be informed
of our discussions on this subject. We also agreed that the matter of working
cut the placement of such a person in RFE would be a matter of joint study, but
that it was largely a problem for him to work cut with such assistance as we
can rive.
5. We discussed the question of construction funds for the FIUE and
Shepardson agreed that he would talk with Spencer Thenix in order to arrive at
an over-all estimate of University affairs before submitting an official recuest
for funds. It was agreed, therefore, at this time we would not take any action
on Phenix's request dated 17 February 1953.
6. I stated that I was anxious for a thorough review of Albanian-Rutanian
migre questions and we agreed that after Shepardson had time to give personal
attention to details of these matters, we would have a full discussion here.
SECRET
Security Informas
Milli
H. DURBE
Chief, 10/Tonic

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_308.jpeg ---
14-00000
Security Information.
1 April 1953
MEMORANDUM POR: DIRECTOR CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
SUBJECT:
TRI Deputy Director (Plana)
Chief, Political and Paychological Warfare
Release of Funds for purchase of apartments to house
FEUE personnel.
1. Spencer Phenix, Treasurer of 7, has submitted a request
for the sun c2 82,200.00 to purchase four apartments in Strasbourg,
France, to house some of the tutorial staff of the Free University in
Exile (see attached). FEUE can obtain these promises by special arrange-
ment with the city of Strasbourg, to when these apartments belong.
1s an acute houring shortage in Strasbourg so that these apartments are
Thero
necessary if the teaching staff of the University is to be reasonably
accomodated.
2. I recommend that this sun be released to FEWS frea the CIA
held reserve for FEUE capital construction. The purchase price of
thong quarters is readily recoverable, if necessary, by resale because
of housing abortages in the city of Strasbourg
not be substantially relieved for scratina..
- a shortage which will
Thanss
20.
Biedoi
TROHAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division
Attachment: Lir.fr.Phenix dtd
3/23/63
CONCURRENCE:
Deputy Director (Flans)
SECRET
Security Information
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_309.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
3
Servit
23 March 1953
:
Doar Nelsoni
As requested by you this morning, I quote bolow the taxt of a letter
received today from Paris, regarding the unmished apartments which the
City of Strasbourg is prepared to sell for use by Robertbau personnel.
"This morning I sent you the following cables
*FOR ONE HUNDRED SIXTY THOUSAND FRANCS CAN HAVE OPTION EXPIRIN) CHE
MAY TO PURCHASE FOUR UNFURNISHED APARTMENTS PRICED AT SIXTHEN MILLICH
ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND FRANCS STOP OPTION MUST BE TAKEN UP NOT LATER
THAN TWENTY SEVEN MARCH STOP TISON AND I FAVOR PURCHASE AS REPRESSI
TING MOST SATISFACTORY SOLUTION OF HOUSING PROBLEM LETTER FOLLOWS
SABOLOT'
As stated in Mnat's memorandum of the 9th of March the ofty of
Strasbourg is in control. They are willing to give us an option on
these apartments, at a cost of 160,000 francs, 'sald option to explos
on 1 May 1953. They give us until the 27th of March to take up this
option.
The apartments will be finished on the 1st of August. They have
offered us the following apartments:
a) Southern exposure Ground floor 3½ roozs, plus
kitchot, bathroom and maid's room in attic.
b) Southern exposure
A+
ay.
3rd floor 4 rooms, plus
kitchen, bathroom and said's room in attic.
Fr. 4,075,000
Fr. 4,520,000
c) Northern exposure
m
2nd floor
6'>
3 rooms, plus
Fr. 3,555,000
d) Northern exposure.
Fr. 3,950.000
kitchen, bathroœ: and maid a roca in attic.
"
2nd floor
">
4 reams pluz kitchen
bathroom and maid's room in attic,
!
"
TOTAL
Fr. 16,100,0
To the above total must be added the costs of:
8)
Registration, transfer and notary fe98.
b) Installing electrical fixtures,
c) Installing stoves and ice boxes in kitchen.
d) Furnishing apartments, (I assure none of our staff
will have their own furnitur, etc.)
SECTET
Security Intes

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_311.jpeg ---
1
14-00000
14 May 1953
MEMORANDHIM FOR: Chief, PP
SUBJECT:
Letter from G. M. Dimitrov
The attached letter to Mr. Shepardson with ap-
pended Agenda and Procedures of the Plenary Session of the
B.N.C. came to me through a reliable source in New York.
Mr. Dimitrov is unaware that these papers have fallen into
our hands. I am passing them along to you for whatever
interest they may have. You may want to send them to Tom
Braden for his scrutiny and files. It should be underlined,
that Mr. Dimitrov must not became aware of our having
secured this material.
F
Attachments
Richard Helms
Chief of Operations, DD/P
3787

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_310.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
"
tion
It is estimated the loan
came to Fr. 4,300,000, making; a
total of 20,100,000 fans or $53,000.00 at 350 francs to in
dollar,
I am aware of your reasons for not wishing to cm real estate
in Europe. liowover, the problem of finding muitable quarto for
the College staff in a difficult one, Providing the funds an
available, Ty and I are in favor of purchase, an those apartments
provide or inmediato partial solution to difficult problems
If you should decide to take up the option, we can discuss the
finncial dotails of the purchase when you visit Paris
month."
You will note that for the relatively all payment of 160,000 francs,
an option will be granted valid until 1 May 1953, and since it is obvious
that a final decision cannot be immediately mido, I have cabled Paris, ros
questing that the option be purchased so that wo may have time to consider
the problem carofully.
I shall be in Washington naxt Sunday evening and available for dis-
cussion Monday morning. If you have not been able to clear the question
before then, I suggest that you set up a meeting with George Lefton at
which Daniel Church and I can present our views in the hope of obtaining.
prapt determination.
"J
Sincerely,
E William L. Digby
SECRET.
Security Information
N
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_31.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
7
1
!
necessary in the past, is not satisfactory at present.
Added to this
has been the theme that there must be a re-thinking of what NCFE has
done, is doing, and should do in the future. Our efforts are beginning
to bear fruit. Wo have found that these lines have struck a responsive
chord among the working personnel of NOVE. In many ways, the current
RFE difficulties in Germany -- unfortunate as they are -- have been
helpful, for they have made it clear to everybody cummoned, including
Mr. Lang, that re-thinking of objectives and techniquou based on comp-
orative effort by NOH and CIA as a whole is vital if the organisation
is to do its job effectively.
6. To reformulate our own and NCP's ideas, the 10 Division has
been and is carrying on discussions with the officials and working
personnel of NCFE. In some of these discussions, Mr. Prancis D. Stevena
of the State Department has been a direct participant. Ine I Division
has also been exploring these matters with officials of CIA and tiso
Department of State.
7. These discussions have covered a wide variety of subjects whic}:
oan generally be described as follows:
A. What is NCPF's place as a whole in American policy toward
the satellite nations; what is American policy; what modifications
are likelyt
b. How can HCPT, especially the Division of Fire Holations,
contribute more effectively to paychological and political warfare,
not only for effects behind the Iron Curtain but in the five world?
For example: How can NCFE securely engage in furtior activities in
the pattern of its successful actions at the United Nations Slave
Labor Hearings and the Intorn tional Red Cross Meetings at Toronto?
Should HCH continue to support enigra councils, or should
some other technique be developed which can onable it to make more
effective use of emigres for psychological warfare purposes?
C.
d. How can the Research and Publications Division, the Divi-
aton of Intellectual Comparation, and the Fron University boot
contribute to these efforts?
Is NCFE efficiently organized? What, for example, is the
affect of the Division of igre Relations' dealings with emigros
on the position of RFE in Europe, etc.?
f.
How the formidable research and information resources of
NOFF can socurely be used by CIA
8. How can NOE be geared more closely to the activities and
needs of CIA?
7. SECURITY INF
+

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_312.jpeg ---
14-00000
STATION
9 June 1953
MIZMORANDUM FOR:
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Bradshaw Project
Attached is an accounting signed by William L. DIGBY
of the Bradshaw Project for the period August 15, 1952 to
May 27, 1953. This is for retention in your files.
Attachment
As stated.
CIO: THB/sh
Orig
->
1 cc -
1 co
->
Addressee
10/TONIC
CIO
1 co - RI
[signed] THOMAS, W. BRADEN
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SEOPET
SECURITY INFORMATION
:
I
}

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_313.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
:
SECRET
Security Terraction
2 June 1953
1
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Romarks for moeting with Spencer Phenix et al
on Thursday, 2:30 PM, 4 Juno 1953
1. At a PRC action on Friday, 29 May, as an interim notion
ponding a full review in August of NCFE's total program and budget
the Division recommended;
a. NCFE be given three months operating expenses
43,945,104 - the current rate of expenditures;
b. 8813,590 to be put in the Free Europe University in
Exile account - the proposed FY 1954 operating expenditures
with authority for NCIE to draw upon this account for three
months at the current rate of expenditures, NCFE authorities
had requested that the full amount be made available to them
at this time to enable them to comply with the legal require-
monte of the Board of Regents of the State of New York, to
which the University is responsible. It was expressly stated
that the activities of the FUE would be subject to the later
full review and that the recommended action in no way implied
approval of University activities at this time; and 1
0. Approval for RFE capital expenditures of $1,299,275
for the completion of 's transmitter program in its prosent
locations. The funds for these expenditures were to come out
of Crusade funds which, as you know, are specifically raised
for capital construction.
2. In its action the PPC:
:
A.. Refused to allow the $3,945,104 which NCP2 requested
to cover its current operating expenses by cutting this figure
to $3,000,000 with the statement NCPE can come back for more
if necessary, and with the further stipulation that Crusade
funds be used for this purpose;
b. Refused to allow RE to undertake its proposed capital
development but authorized this Division to investigate the
possibility of using two 100 kw transmitters owned by this
Agency and as well as the purchase of the unused 100 ku's from
VOA; and
:
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_317.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
i
4-1139
May 5, 1953.
20 May 50-S3.
58
Mr. E. M. Levitas,
Executive Editor,
The New Leader,
7 East 15th Street,
New York 3, N.Y.
Dear Mr. Levitast
In January 1953 en arrangement was made
whereby you were to send 1000 copies of The N
Leader to England and to Europe during the current
70880
We wish to discontinue that arrangement,
We do not wish to have our contribution used
_ longer in that way.
I would like to discuss with you at your
early convenience the question of the return to us
of some part of that contribution in view of the
peper, printing and mailing costs which will be
saved by the discontinuence..
WR3:IRH
Yours sincerely,
President.
I
!
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_315.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
;
1.
sound. NCFE officials should be present at the budget review- to
answer such questions. This is their responsibility. If we are
dissatisfied with the present management, we should get a new one.
1.
We have, however, the responsibility of making a detailed
review of the policies and the activition of NCFE undertaken in
pursuance of their mission as given to them by this Agency, NCFE
is entitled to know that its programs and policies are approved and
that no after the fact question can arise. Equally, NCFE is not
entitled to undertake programs or activities which are not approved
by this Agency.
At the completion of its review of NCEE's proposed program
for FY 1954, a review which involves detailed examination in coonera-
tion with the CIA stairs and area divisions and with the Department
of State, I Division will make its recommendations to the proper
Agency officials for their final action. Buch an orderly procedure
will enable this Agency to have completely reviewed NCFE activities,
to have concurred in each, and will allow NCFE to proceed in the
mowledge that its activities are fully authorized and approved.
1
6. I, therefore, propose that the meeting on Thursday be
confined to Phenix and his budget officer during which the above
aproach can be made. I will leave for your judgment the question
whether the actions of the PRC on Friday should be opened for review
and modification. Phenix will certainly want to do so for the
following reasons;
a. The operating funds authorized are not adequate'};
bi The directive to use Criaade funds for operational
expenses runs counter to established procedures and NCFE's
commitments to the public in the use of such funda;
C. The failure to approve RPE capital items now roans a
delay into next year of the installation of transmitting
equipment, which if approved now, can be in place and operating
by October of this year. (This will not be the case if you
authorise our use of the Agency owned 100 kw's and a purchase
of the VOA transmitters can be arranged, which I believe can);
account.
d.
There are not sufficient surplus funds, (excluding the
Crusade, to a ply to the Free Europe University) (There are,
however, impressed cash funds which are a three months' operating
advances in NCFE's possession which can be used Phenix aɛrees.)
:
->>
V. GRADES!
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
TION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_316.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
TO
->
"
n
-
UNCLASSIFIED
"
DCI
RESTRICTED™
ONFIDENTIAL
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
FROM
CIO
2
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
SECRET
i
!
]
INITIALS
DATE
INITIALS
DATE
TWB
8 May
APPROVAL
ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
SIGNATURE
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
RETURN
DISPATCH
FILE
REMARKS:
This is the letter which whitney Shepardson
sent to Sol Levitas, about which you are aware.
Th
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED
FORM 30-4
BEP. 1907
15-43794-1
UNCLASSIFIED
9. G. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_318.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
}
SECURITY INFORMATION
Orig to Io/BrI
SECRET
MAT
4
MEMORANDCH FOR: CHIFF; INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
IO/BRANCH ONE
Utilization of Various Balkan Emigre Groups
by SE Division for Operational Purposes
In reply to a roquest made by Miss Stern of your office for
detailed information concerning the operational utilisation of various
Balkan emigre groups by SE Division, there are attached as tabs
to this memorandum studies covering our activities among the
Albanian, Bulgarian, Rumanian and Yugoslav emigration. No understand
that this information is required to provide a basis for reviewing
the operational plan and budget of the Fund for the coming year.
Since the information is considered highly sensitive, it is forwarded
for your information only.
Christian 1. Freer
Acting Chief, SE
Tab A - SH Ptilization of Albanian Emigre Groups
Tab B - SE pailization of Bulgarian Imigre Groups
Tab C - SE stilization of Yugoal av migro Groups
Tab D - SE Utilization of Rumanian Emigre Groupa
:
SECRET
...
1.
i
i
"
:
"

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_314.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
,1
1
0. Refused to appropriate any money for the FEUE, but
directed NCFE to transfer funds from other accounts including
that of the Crusade for Freedom to the FEDE, authorizing NCFE
to incur expenditures for three months at the current rate.
3. The intent of this Division in its recommendations to the
PRC was to provide NCFE and the FEUE with the operating funds neces-
sary to continue its notivities in the FY 1954 at the current rate.
These fundo ware to tide NCFE over the first months of FY 1954,
pending a thorough budgetary and program review and subsequent pro-
sentation and recommendations to proper CIA authorition in the month
of Agint. At that time whitney Shonardson will have completed his
initial tour of inspection, and can be on hand to defend his budget
and our recommendations thereto.
The only exception to this procedure was the request for
Approval of Ris's capital neods. This requent was made after a
thorough examination of proposals by this Division and General
McClelland, office of Communications, his technical staff and RFE
engineers. As a result, General McClelland authorised this Division
to state to the PRC that the RFR proposals were technically sound.
As far as these capital expenditures are concerned the 10 Division
had completed its review and recommended their approval in order that
there be no delay in getting this additional transmitter equipment in
place.
4. I would strongly suggest that the mooting on Thursday not
involve a general budgetary review. It should be confined, in my
opinion, to a statement to Mr. Spencer Phenix and his budgetary
officer, who should be the sole NCFE officers present, that CIA will
conduct through the 10 Division:
Q.
|
A thorough and dotailed review of all current activities
and new activities proposed by NCFE}.
b. A financial review in the sense that all financial infor-
mation necessary to support the NCFE program and budget is made
available. Our study of this financial information will be
confined to a general review to ensure accuracy, adequate explana-
tions of uncertain items and a general analysis to ensure proper
budgetary procedures, I would like to point out and strongly
emphasise that we have already received the utmost cooperation
from the officials of NCFE in getting such program and fiscal
Information.
5. We cannot, in my opinion, having granted NCFF broad authority
in the execution of its task, seek to impose our judgment for theirs
in the details of their management of this project. Such matters as
were raised at the PRC, 1.e. whether the request for replacement of
32 trucks is based on Agency standards for truck replacement, have in
my opinion no place in such a review. We can review management and
fiscal policies in a broad sense to satisfy ourselves that they are
.'

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_319.jpeg ---
:
21
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Rich 31 man.
brig given burbe
Lipr
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Reported Financial Support of
Dr. Dimitrov by Bulgarians in Germany
Memorandum (10-3-682), dated 2 March 1953.
1. With regard to reference memorandum, this Division
has long suspected that some such arrangement existed. Any
money which Dr. Dimitrov managed to extract from the Guard
Company members is obtained by him as a result of his own
personal sway exercised over this group of Bulgarians.
1
2. It has also come to our attention that Dr. Dimitrov
is receiving money from miscellaneous Bulgarians in Canada
and the United States in the name of a trust fund which he
has sat up. You are no doubt aware of this development.
3. We are most interested in getting from you, your
estimate of Dr. Dimitrov's income from all sources swoll
as a listing of those sources of income about which you
know.
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
CHRISTIAN M. FREER
ACTING CHIEF, SE
!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_321.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
1
"
1
:
it
SECRET
c. Pr. Ion Claudian is reportedly engaged at the present
time in emigra Iron Guard activities in Europe.
5. If further information is desired, please contact Mine Nowsom,.
extension 195.
Attachments As stated above
SECRET
7-
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE
1.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_32.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1.
· 4
:
h. Analysis of Radio Free Europe's effectiveness, programming,
political position in Germany, how RFF can be used to support CIA
operations specifically, alternate broadcasting sites for RFE òto.
1. How can give specific guidance to HFE? What kind of
information is wanted, for example, by RFE? What studies and means
of overcoming Jamming can be made availablo to RFE? How can American
and Brition logations in the satellites best provide guidance and
information for RFE?
7. These are some of the toples being discussed. In a few weeks
the time will come in my opinion when the main outlines of this common
thought will be sufficiently clear so that the working officials of NCFE,
including Mr. Lang, should meet with officials of CIA and the Department
of State for two main purposes:
a. A briefing on U.S. policy toward CIA operations berind tha
Iron Curtain so that trace officials will see clearly the way in which
they are expected to fit into total U.S. efforts, and the manner in which
they should operate.
b.
Analyze and contribute, in come detail, to the main lines
of thought developed in order to arrive at comprehensive working policy
for NCPE, and detailed methods of its cooperation with CIA.
8. For the foregoing reasons, I suggest that Mr. Lang does not,
this time, come down to meet the CIA officials as suggested by
Mr. Helme but that Mr. Lang's visit be a part of the It Division's
over-all effort to gain working control over NCFF au briefly outlined
above.
IO:TONIC: WPD/eh
Orig
-
Addressee (thru CPP)
AC/OP/DD/P
1 oc -
->>
-
CPP
IO/TONIC
CO
1 co
100
1 cc - RI
THOMAS M. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECHET
TOPINATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_323.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
TAL
MAR 25 1958
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Paychological Warfare Division
SUBJECT:
The New Leader
Mixin
Confirming the instructions from DCI which I relayed to
you by telephone last week, CIA is not to pay for overseas
subscriptions to the New Leader either by direct or indirect
channela.
-
:
CC: C/IO
T
(Signed) ALFRED C. ULMER R
ALFRE
ALFRED C. ULMER JR.
Assistant Chief
Political and Psychological Warfare Staff
'
:
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_322.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGRET
Security Information
burber
orig to Stern
Read:
4/2/53
26 March 1953
·MEMORABITED. FOR: CHIEF, IO
SUBJECT:
REFERENCES
:
.
Bulgarian Cuard Company
Secret Memo from Chief, IO, Subject: Information on
Quasi-soldiers located in Frankfurt dated 19 March 1953
1. Sole control of the Bulgarian Guard Company was assumed by
USAREUR in December 1952. Since there was never a definite period of
onlistmezt, members of the Company were free to leave at will. As a
result, there was a considerable turn-over of personnel, The maximum.
T/O strength was 200. Peak strength, about 30 in excess of T/U, was
reached in 1952. However, this number was immediately reduced to 200.
.
2,
The Company was continually plagued by the constant political
activion of the adherents of Dr. Georgi N. Dimitrov. It is estimated.
that a maximum of 40 members were hard-core Dimitrov adherents.
3. The first Bulgarian Commander of the Company was Stefan Boidev.
Upon his removal from the Company, Borislav Baichev was appointed in
his place.
4.
Stoyan Dobrev (Palazov) does not appear on the last roster of
Guard Company members (September 1952) available to us. He was one of
the early members of the Company.
SECRET
JOHN E. BAKER
CHIFF, SE
1
:
27
"
it
**
|
:
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_320.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
CHIEF TO DIVISION
SUBJECT
Proposal for Establishing a Microfilm Library
of Rumanian Reference Material
}
[MAR 27
1. The attached paper outlines a project which may be of
interest to your division. A Rumanian omigre, interested in
propaganda and cultural sctivities, prepared the paper after con-
wilting with a number of refugee scholars.
2. Although the results of such a project would be of great
value to our Rumanian operations, implementation is considered
beyond the scope of the activition of this Division. Further,
it appears more practicable for a project of this type to be
undertaken by a research or cultural organization, rather than
an intelligence agency, in order that the results may be more
widely used.
.3.
It is suggested that the NOVE, which is concerned with
worthwhile employment of refugee intellectuals, may be interested
in this project for its Mid-European Stadios Center. If the NCNE
is not in a position to finance such a project, it is possible that
a privately endowed foundation would be interested. The emigra
has discussed this project with Dr. Sergius Yacobson of the Library
of Congress and with Professor Moseley of the Russian Institute
of Columbia University. He has reported that both agencies appear
interested.
1. Because of some doubt concerning the reliability of throm
of the individuals mentioned in section III of the attached re-
port, the following data is submitted for your information:
8.
Fr. Mircea Eliade was formerly editor of an Iron Guard
(Rumanian fascist group) newspaper and a doctrinaire of the
Guard. He is reported to have disassociated himself from the
Guard in the last year but this infomation cannot be confirmed.
:
b. Dr. Leontin Constantinescu reported as formerly pro-
Iron Guardist in his gympathies.
**
SECRET
1-
+

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_325.jpeg ---
14-00000
EXP
SECRET
Security Information.
-2-.
'the direction of administrative and finance people. Jim Incṭt, who is
as scrupulous and thorough as any man can be, made all such arrangements
and I would accept his recommendations of what needs to be done, if any-
thing.
=
KILLING F. DORNER
Chief, 10/TONIC
SECRET
Security Information
:
i
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_324.jpeg ---
Y
14-00000
:
pls discuss
with we
SECRET
Security Information
16 March 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
Hemorandum dated 13 March 1953, Subject: "Hotes on
Paris Trip"
SUBJECT:
1.
12
1. C. D. Jackson wrote the Doris Juke Foundation on Cohromen's
behalf, asking that he be granted 10,000. He was granted this amount.
20
Zurcher Berle. (: Co. are meeting in New York today an! I have done
everything that I can to ensure that Tyson gets full bucking. I think this
was really already being done as far as possible. When I got back, I
puggested that this be done and a telegram was sent to Tycon giving him full
authority to act in any manner in which he saw fit, including the firing of
Malcom Davis. In my discussion with Shepardson this morning he agreed that
the entire mibject of the University and its future should be discussed
immediately. He will, therefore, examine their position in this matter for
our consideration and he agreed to withdraw the request for construction
funds until they tienselves know what they wish to do.
3. In discussing the PTUC in Exile with Spencer Phenix while you were
away, I was informed that you had decided that support would be withdrawn
after June 30. If this is no, I wonder how Pacak could be employed unless
it has other means of support. Phenix also informed me that bennen agreed.
to go back to Paris for at least six months on an expenses paid basis with
no salary.
PPE.
done.
Frankfurt is supposed to make high level defectors available to
I discussed this while in Munich and was assured that this would be
The difficulty up to now has been Truscott and the unich stations
inability to insist upon anything from Frankfurt.
k. ACUE has a bank account which is used to bank funds passing through
the Committee and which show on ACUE books. Another account is impossible
for cover reasons as funds passed to it would not show in ACUE accounts in
New York but would in Faris, As a result arrangements were made to have
Pugitt's account a joint one with sone administrative officer in Paris or to
have Fugitt sign a blank check to be held in the Paris office. All these
matters were gone into in great detail by inott. Thayer, inky opinion, is
using technique through Tom Hester of Laking business impossible. Knott
shares this opinion as do others. For example, Pitt was granted a raise.
about one year ago, he has not yet received it, etc.
5. I know nothing about the Swiss franc matter and moreover my impression
is that financial procedures now followed in the unity projects, to which I
presume you refer, and which are not in this Division, have been arranged at
SEGRET
Security Information
:
I
T

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_327.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
:
0024
25 March 1953
Dear Dr. Pebry:
I have given a lot of thought within the past
few days to the question of your immediate future
which you raised with me. I find on checking into
our rules and regulations that I simply can't help
you here. I am sorry about this because you are
an impressive man to talk to.
I wish you good luck elsewhere.
Fr. Paul A. Fabry
347 W. 8715 Street.
New York, New York
Sincoroly,
Thomas W. Braden
!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_326.jpeg ---
14-00900
:
SECUMIY I
NATION
1
25 March 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTERLIGINCE
SUBJECT:
Dr. Paul A. Fabry
''
at Clover's suggestion, I saw Paul Fabry, a very
impressive and learned young Hungarian who is not a
citizen and who wanted a job. I have replied to him
negatively in the attachment and do so because there is
a long list of allegations in the files about his and
his vife's Communist associations. These allegations
may or may not be correct but are accepted as correct
by John Hughes who advises most strongly against having
anything to do with him.
}
:
ttachment
THOMAS W. BRADMI
Chief
International Organizations Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_328.jpeg ---
14-00000
i.
Security information
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, 10/PP
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
Mr. Thomas Braden
Mr. Ramboy
7 March 1953
oring given
TÓNIC 10 March
what has
vie Oria
bout this?
74B
Harry Reis talked
like to give you the results of our Registry checks on
Ramsey, who may or may not be identical with the present
British citizen employed by HFE in Hamburg.
1. Reference our conversation sometime ago, I would 5 Sichel on thes
PTT-289
19 Aug 48
FTTA-291
3 June 49
I7-44033
24 Sept 49
FIT-371
5 Oct 48
Subject arrived in Triesto under
sponsorship of Charles K. MOFFLY,
director of AIS. He speaks fluent
Sorbian and during war was commander
of a Yugoslav camp in Egypt. Has
been assigned to planning section
of AMG. AIS 18 cover for SIS.
Individuaï hullevod identical' with
subject signed interrogation report
wither as or for the frieste Security
Officer.
ANTOMIJE, suspected DA for British,
has for three weeks been under con-
stant BIS interrogation by Italian
speaking Pritish Bergeant in apart-
ment of Maj. A.I.E. RAMSEY. Sur-
veillance reveals apartments several
FSS officers in building. Gold, SI
chief, seen entering and leaving
building with subject and several
unidentified British women.
Subject is the head of five Fritish
officers who are in Trieste making
a survey of the entire area prior to
conducting special mission in Yugo-
slavia.
. Mr
3
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_329.jpeg ---
14-00000
->
2 -
:
MAV_OVERT
20 June 57
IN-22201
2 Sept 47
IN-21808
27 Aug
WEL-593
12 Sept 47
Subject British PS? (Pub. Soc.
Officer) Graz. Intervened in the
case of Josef Neger.
Subject is in Graz. Cuestion as to
whether in FSS or NI-6.
Subject was named by Mary Allison
Miksa, now held in prison in Baden
by the Soviets, as IS officer in
Graz.
Public Safety Officer in Military
Government in Graz. He has been in
contact with representatives of
British Austrian Station.
7. Ramsey no doubt is an extremely desirable officer
for RFS and I see no objection to a man with intelligence
background being employed by RFE, since quite obviously tho
combination of language and background mast be invaluable to
their program, but I still believe that these FFE posts which
could be exploited best by us should be occupied by American
citisena, who can be cleared by us and who will have American
intelligence interests closest to their hearts. You may or
may not know that FFS, especially in such places as Berlin
and Vierna, is one of the important screening points for
refugees coming from the Satellite areas and as such the
RFE representatives act as bind-dogs for this agency's FI
program wherever possible.
3. I should appreciate your keeping me advised on the
possibility of keeping Kenneth Dean Koch in Serlin as the
RFF. representative.
PETER SICHEL
EE/F1992
Sect
laferniation
|
I
1
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_330.jpeg ---
14-00000
Gi
MEMORANDUM FOR 1
ATTENTION
VIAI
SUBJECT:
SECRET
Security Information
Chief, IO Divisiot
Mr. Durkee
C/PP
5 March 1953
Radio Free Europe. Miscellaneous matters;
conversation with Mr. Lang.
1. This is a brief report for the benefit of Mr. Durkee and
for the information of Messrs. Parnes and Braden, concerning certain
aspects of my luncheon conversation with Hr.Robert E. Lany of
March.
2. I believe that I was successful in covering in one way or
another all of the points raised with me by Mr. Durkee prior to R
conversation with Mr. Lang. I will not attempt in this memorandum
to recepitulate the entire conversation, but I will comment on
certain aspects thereof and state that, in peneral, the conversatiea
seemed to me to be quite satisfactory.
3. I received the impression that there are still "wheels
within wheels" and much internal friction within the NCFE set-up.
This is very regrettable, but it seems to be a fect of life which
I think should be brought to the attention of Mr. Shepardeon at
very early date, and he should be urged to bring the warring factions
together on a more auicable basis. The personalities involved ara
all important to the success of the operation and it is a great shane
that they spend so much of their time and energy trying to out-maneuver
and creckmate one another. I would not "give up" Bob Lang on this in
talking with Mr. Shepardson -- but simply make this as a general of
servation of ours.
4. I came down quite hard on Bob with respect to the Leland
Stowe brochure which Mr. Durkee handed to me and which I return to
you herewith. 1. pointed out that this thing struck us as quite bad,
and for three good and sufficient reasons, to wit,
It represents too much concentration of effort on
publicity and propaganda within the United States our
target is the satellites and to some extent the rest of the
free world, but we have no charter to operate or propagandise
within the United States and this only invites trouble when
it is done;
SECRET
Security Information
2574
!
1
i
:
i
'

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_33.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
i
i
Bill
Live wesive my
Security Inig
thes
They are writing memo.
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, 10 Division
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
1.
arig quen Ellenstiv
NOV 26 1952
Formation of a Unified Rumardan Refuges.
Organisation
Nemorandum to 10, Subject: Current U. S. Attempt
to form a Unified Rumanian Refugee Organization,
dated 12 September 1952
The NCFE negotiations for a united Rumanian refuces organization
appear to be culminating successfully. Although a number of differences
These points
have been resolved, a few controversial matters remain.
have been discussed several times, both with the NCTE and the refugees,
but are of such importance as to warrant special attention and emphasis
at this moment.
2. The most urgent problem, the one most likely to nullify the
recent efforts and cause further difficulties, is that of General Hedescu.
The problem is to find a position which the General will consider suffi-
ciently important for him and which we will consider sufficiently innocuous
to ensure that he cannot interfere with the Committee. A majority of the
1 refugees are in accord on the necessity for placing limitations of activ-
ity on the General. For operational reasons, we require such limitations.
The existing good relations between the NCFE and the General should be
utilised to persuade the General that a passive, honorary position is the
He must
only way to guard his health for, by implication, later action.
If
be made to realise that he is not being shelved but is being saved.
he cannot be prevailed on to adopt this attitude, he will have to bo told
with complete frankness that his obstructionism cannot be tolerated, that
he will have to remain passive outside, rather than within, the new organ-
isation or risk losing the assistance he now receives. The first method
is the more desirable, and it is suggested that the General's secretary,
Earbu Niculescu, to informed of the NCHE's intention and warned of the
latter step if his cooperation is not obtained in expediting the General's
acceptance of a rassive role. Niculescu should be dealt with quite frankly
and informed of the consequences, to him as well as to the General, if he
does not cooperate.
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_331.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECKET
•
:
'
b. As written, this communication or brochure has
every appearance of offering a new international news.
service to American editors. It is called "The RFE News
and Information Service".) It he not indicated whether
this will to charged for or furnished free of charge to
the proposed newspaper recipients -- but in either case
it would be almost sure to bring down upon the head of KPE
the wrath, indignation and hostility of all the major news
services who are extremely jealous and sensitive about com-
petition of any kind, but partielerly Government competition.
The news services and newspapers have played ball pretty well
in covering up our dark secrat, but I suspect that anything
of this kind would make enemies out of friends and set the
news services upon a course of deliberate exposure.
C. This move points up eat invites attention to Leland-
Stowe's present position and, az euch, opens up unnecessary
vulnerabilities to the kind of atteck with which we are all
too familiar concerning indivimals who have "written a book".
Bob Lang had no ready or very satisfactory explanation of this matter
said that he had not known about it or hed not seen it -->> and that
he could only interpret it as an effort on Stowe's part to personally
rehabilitate himself. I said that I had no objection to a program
of self-rehabilitation on Stowe's part, but that he simply could not
do so at the expense of the organization for which he works.¯¯¯ Long
appeared to agreo.
5. I told Mr. Lang that as far as we understood it there would
be no objection to his going to Turkey to see what he could negotiate
for himself. Ambassador :McChoo's cable appears to have relieved
State Department's objections and the only question seams to be one
of operational feasibility and desirability as regards his making
the effort with the Turks. I ventured to predict that he would run
into difficulties with the Turks, and suggested that if he were to
fail in iis Turkish mission he might stop by in Greece to look into
the situation there, which I said we had reason to believe might be
more favorable.
Enel (1)
A G. WISHON
7. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
Mineo brochure offering reports
via "RPE's News & Information
Service."
SECRET
Seturis Informa
i
1
;

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_334.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
1. Alimehmoti, Kasen (Dr.)
2.
Andoni, Alfred
3. Andoni, Vasil
4.
Bajraktari, Muharom
5.
Binaku, Ëjup.
6. Damani, Selia
7
Delvina, Hipnot
8. Dibra, Adem (Dr.)
9.
Dilo, Jani
10. Dime, Dilaver
11. Dosti, Hasan
12.
13.
14.
Enmenji, Abas
Farka, Ibrahim
Fratari, Rauf
15. Gogh, Georges
16. Kogi, Atlas
17. Kotta, Nuci
13.
Kryeziu, Said
19. Kupi, Abas
20. Maci, Halil
Meniku, Halil
Mulleti, Ilyaini
21.
22.
23.
Pali, Zef
24.
25.
Ferpoza, Hysen
Pashkopija, Nexhat
26. Rushiti, Haki
27. Skendi, Stavro'
28. Tafilaj, Tani
29. Toptani, Ishan
30.
Zernal-Cenay, Asllan
SEOPET
Security Information
I
1
:
}

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_333.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
SECURITY UNIOR:
R -
5. As was agreed in a recent discussion between Major Mitchell of this
Division and Miss Stern of your office, we hope such embarrassments may be
avoided in the future by bringing the facts to the attention of RFB and by
asking RFB to limit its list of writers to those specifically approved by this
Division.
Attachment (1)
DECRET
1
JOHN K. BAKER
Chief, SE
:
:
i
F
!
Fehler wh¢??\? FAÑA 1995.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_335.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
:
Suspens 60 ch
26 February 1953
KEMORANDUM TO: Acting Director, Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Agency
Dr. Lela Boszormenyl-Nagy-
1. This is in response to your request for our
views regarding the attached letter from Dr. Bela
Boszormenyi-Nagy.
2. Our files contain only a limited amount of
information regarding Dr. Boszormenyi-lingy. However,
it is unlikely that information regarding Hungary which
he acquired prior to September 1948 would add very much
to information we have obtained from refugees and
defoctors who left Hungary more recently and who were
better situated to observe at first hand the top govern-
ment officials there.
.3. I would suggest, therefore, that in acknowledg
ing Dr. Boszormenyi-Nagy's letter we advise him not to
make a special trip to Washington. Instead, we might
suggest that if he is here on other business at some
future time he should get in touch with Mr. DuBose at
Sterling 3-5520. (Durose is with the Contact Division,
Office of Operations).
JOHN A. BROSS
Chief, Eastern European Division
5 Mar 53
Note on cover sheet returned to EO/DD/P states:
"IO/TONIC concurs in subject memo
->
ES per WPD
!
A
i
My
....
TIL
.i
i
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_332.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Recd 6 March's
sint. to Stern
:
MEMORANDUM FOR: C/10
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
Miss Stern
8 Material for Transmittal to RPB.
1. Forwarded horowith is a list of persons who are considered to be
acceptable script writers for Albanian material to be prepared for use by
RFE. It was originally intended to forward a list of persons not considered
suitable, but it was later felt that this negative approach might allow some.
unacceptable persons to slip through. You will note that this approved list
consists of only 30 names, If RFE proposes to use any persons not on the
list all that they have to do is submit the name of the proposed script writer.
so that we may check our files for any information on him. Immediately upon
receipt of the name of a person we will reply, stating whether the person is:
(a) unacceptable now, (b) may be used one time only, or (c) may be used and
added to the approved list.
2. Of particular interest to us, and something wo consider worthy of
RFB's attention, is the recent use of Ernest Koliqi for the preparation of a
script. Mr. Koliqi is a member of the HKI, a political organization which has
beon unacceptable in the past. Mr
Mr. Koliqi is further unacceptable as an indi-
vidual by reason of his past. From the condensed information available on him
it appears that he "cooperated with the Italian Minister to Tirana in preparing
the Italian occupation
returned to Tirana (he had long lived in Italy as
.
he does now) where he held the post of Minister of Education 1939-1943.
Member of the Albanian Fascist party."
3. It would seem that the use of Mr. Keligi for the preparation of
scripts is subject to serious question. In this script for February 22, page
2, he states "a much better presentation of the various literary phases
is the anthology entitled The Albanian Writers published in 1941 by the
Minister of Education." (Note that he was the Minister of Education during
this period under the Fascist government.)
4. There are other specific examples of possibly doubtful persons baving.
been used in the preparation of scripts. Dimiter Barati, a Zogist official
then Zog was in power, a Fascist official when the Fascists were in power, and
now reported to be a Communist stooge, was used on several occasions. Zer
Shiro, formerly, and possibly still, editor of the Fascist magazine "Albania”
was used for the preparation of a script on January 5.
5. As was agreed in a
-
÷

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_336.jpeg ---
14-00000
INFORMATION
sint & DD/P (va. Hill)
:
5 March 1953
William F. Heinlich
Scheduled to be employed at a salary of $10,000 on December 1949 as
a program adviser until March 1950. Worked under General Clay and
under General Frank Howley.
Used to be with RIAS (Radio in American Sector). Told he would not
be continued because up to the time (no date) records showed three
official investigations on the following subjects:
1
1. When serving as Intelligence officer, why instead of
putting the Goebbels diarios as captured documents into
official channels known to him, did he turn them over to
private persons in a transaction from which he subregently
xpected to profit, both in cash and in a future position
with Double Day,
2. When
Mon serving as an Intelligence officer, how did it happen
that another captured document being the Geman Appraisal of
USSR Intelligence Service was changed in a foot locker sent
by hainlich to nis kome●
3. Wen serving as head of RIAS, entertaining at the expense.
of the station and ultimately, therefore, of the government
at private American parties, why did he accompany a berman
female singor during her appearance at a dərman vaudevilla
thester? In the latter care, too entire AS saphony orchestra
appeared without payment at the German theater for a period of
one Neck. Then was an investigation into the existence of
extensive payroll padein at RIAS when subject was informed
that the State Department did not wish to inform him and he
thereupon resigned.
1000 Appraisal:
'
1 He is generally dishonest in his day to day dealings and apparently
is in the fricating any story wich contrilates to
to 13
particular objectives at any particular time. The people in ICOS
would not ok with favor upon his employment by any perican organization
in Germany.
Private Sourcet
He is
abroad to survey instaliations, etc. Munich people
have been warned against him.
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_339.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
J. 12.
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
:
12 February 1753
Dear Oliver,
Would you be kind enough to pass qu
the enclosed memorandum to Ed Greene
Many thanks.
Enc. 1
Sincerely yours,
Kenneth
Kenneth J. Haliers
#764-6
Lills Church, Va.
Dentis 2433 Kolmes Run Drive
SEGNET
SECURITY INFORMATION.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_340.jpeg ---
14-00000
0
P
12 February 1953"
110 W. 57th Street
New York City.
Dear Ed,
I saw your name on a piece of paper today written in
recommendation of one Chica Cantacuzino on 2677th stationery
no loss.
We are considering him for a job with the Rumanian
desk and would be grateful for your comments. He seems, 80
far as we have been able to determine, to be well equipped
but a difficult personality.
Hope to see you sometime soon.
(For Edward Greene)
Sincerely yours,
/8/ Bob
Robert E. Lang
1.21
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_338.jpeg ---
14-00000
::
SEPPE
Sperter
;
↑ Gren
Elle 13 Pat
12 1953
ESHMORANDUM FOR: IO DIVISION
SUBJECT:
1.
Attempts of Virgil POFA to Socure Employment
with RFS Munich.
1.
The information below was reported by a KUBARK source, and
was acquired in Munich during October 1957
P. Virgil POPA has renewed his attempts to secure ·
employment with RFS Munich. Subject is in possession of
a letter of recommendation signed by Barou NICULESCU and
issued in the name of General Nicolsa RADESCU. The letter
recommended Subject as a good and capable Rumanian to
General Ion GHEORGHE and Alexander GORIAN, the latter
an RFE employee, and requested them to assist Subject in
gaining employment with RFB Hunich. Subject has taken the
letter to GREGORIAN in Munich, and has visited him several
times, in each instance pressing him for a job.
b. POPA has explained to GREGORIAN that he wishes to
igrate to the United States, but because he is anti-SIMA,
the Simists have informed U. S. authorities that he is a
Legionary. As a result, he was interned at Ellis Island
and refused entry into the United States. GREGORIAN is aware
that FOPA is still an important Legionary leader, and that
this explanation is a typical Legionary maneuver.
2. It is requested that RFE be informed of the above infor-
nation.
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, S3
SEANE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_337.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
7
774-4
February 25, 1953.
:
Dear Georges
Confirming what I have just told you on the nose, our mutual friend
wrote Michael a note the exact contents of which are as follows:
"After you left this afternoon, Mr. Robert Tosgeler came in
to nee me, and among other things told me that to his certain
knowledge, RFE had been infiltrated.
"I picked up the word and asked him if he would tell me more
about it, to which he replied that maybe he had used too strong a
word. So then I told him to pick any word he wanted, but to tell
me what he meant.
"He then told me that there were people working for RPS who
were either ex-Communists or ex-Socialists who were utterly dis-
credited in their own country and who were doing more harm than
good. I asked him if he cared to tell me who some of these people
were, to which he replied that he did not come to the office to
denounce anybody. I thought I would leave it as that and we went
on to another subject.
'
"However, the purpose of his trip to Washington was to feed
information to Senator EcCarthy's Committee, he will be re-
turning in another ten days to give him some more advice.
and
#I think it would be most important for jou or Bob Lang to.
have a word with this gentleman and see if you can't find out.
whom he is talking arout, as I am sure you would be eager to know
and to act if justified.”
It was our friend's suggestion, and we will act upon it, that together
with Michael and Kenneth Walters I try to see Voegeler. This I will do as soon
as I can locate him, and I learn that he is now in New York. We here have in-
formation that Voegeler associates socially with an individual who having failed
of employment with the Fund some time ago, has since last 20 opportunity to
condemn the Fund as being infiltrated. The latter inclinal's identity is
known to Michael us is also the basic situation which gives some color to the
allegation.
I will reserve further comment on this until I see you personally, or
I will instruct Michael to give you this background when he next goes down to
see your colleagues.
J
Sincerely,
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_341.jpeg ---
14-00000
in
12 February 1953
.
At 1715 I was called to Brad Connor's office and shown a memorandum
tes 10 February 1953, "Hosting with Representatives John Taber and
Cff Clevenger on February 6, 1953 Baker East and Baker West".
..
Pra nemorandum was signed by General Stonor. Present weres
Rep. John Taber
Rep. Cliff Clevenger
Dr. Wilson Compton
-
General Frank ZumeT
I/R - Mr. Crosby
Iro
I
-> Mr. Connors
-
Mr. Harris
5
->>
-> Mr. Morton
Mr. Barnard
-
Mr. Lourio
IBS/NY
S
General Stoner had been discussing the need for money for more
installations for YOA. At the top of page 3 of his memo; there is
found the following:
PHr. Taber mentioned that we had a large Munich plant. He
Baid that this was the alleged place of employment of Ruby
Parsons. No stated that our plant in Munich was not
comparable to the large plant built up by RFE, that wo
felt there should be a closer coordination on a tochnical
level between the various US activities engaged in inter-
national broadcasting in Europe and that there wasn't any
reason why a single contralized plant should not be able
to serve Radio Free Europe, Voice of America, Armed Forces
Network, and the African Committee for the Liberation of
the Peoples of Russia.
"dhen liberation of the Peoples of Russia was mentioned as
a potential broadcaster, Fr. Taber made notes and said that
he would look into the matter. He was told that the single
building in Munich erected by RFE could also house all the
feeders located in separate sites and separate buildings
pertaining to U.S. ectivities mentioned above. He was .
particularly interested in this possibility.”
Pr. Connors told me that he had ordered page 3 of this memo
remitten to ant these tam paragraphs before the paper got further
circulation. However, he wanted us to know what Stoner had said
as shown by these two paragraphs, so that we could take any action
158 see fit with reference to Taber and Clevenger. Connors said he
didn't know how far we cut in the Appropriations Committee. He
said that he had warned. Stoer "twenty times" not to reveal such
things. He stated that Stoner had learned these things while in
Germany.
7NFORMATION
ARISTIDES G. LAZARUS
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_34.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Secu
I
3. In regard to paragraph 4 of reference nemorandum, the matter of
the Council apparently has not ween discussed thoroughly with the refugees.
The Laportance of an organization for the masses of refugees, controlled
by the Executive Committee of 16-17, anould not be underestimated. The
working commissions proposed by Visoianu (European Federation Movement,
PM, rustications, etc.) should be drawn from the Council rather than from
the refugees at large. Further, there are many refugees for whom the
Committee has no need, nor we at resent, who desire to participate in a
refupee organization. That the desire to belong to something is particularly
strong among the younger refugees, i.e. those of potential operational valuo,
is evidenced by the number who have affiliated with the Iron Guard, other
fanatic organizations, student, and professional groups. Membership should
be oper to large numbers of refugees (exclusive of hard-core Iron Guards,
Communists, criminals, etc.), and should be manifested by membership cards.
To strengthen the sense of participation small annual ques could be required
or subscription to this Committee newspaper (which would be subsidized so
that subscription cost would not be excessive). The formation of this
Council is considered particularly worthwhile since it offers a way to draw
worthy refugees from less desirable organisations and to develop their use-
fulness for the future.
4. with respect to the secret fund in the possession of Mr. Cretsianu
of the liwaanian National Comittee, we do not consider that an issue should
be made of the discursing and control of this money. Both Vianenu and
Cretzianu have agreed to account for the funds and to auditing of the books.
It is possible that a finance committee, consisting of Cretzianu and one or
two others, will be appointed in the new organisation to handle the sub-
sidies and to audit the secret fund.
5. Reports that Gafencu has developed an intransigent attitude toward
the new committee have been received from several sources. As Mr. Polbeare
is in Europe and is a friend of Cafencu's, it is surected that he attempt
to obtain again bafencu's cooperation with the current negotiations.
6. It is requested that this memorandum be forwarded to the CE so
that the information may be of immediate assistance in the negotiationg
planned for this week.
:
:
RET
JOHN A. RAKER
Chief, SE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_342.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Security Information
10 February 1953.
REINTY DIRECTOR (ARDSTRATION)
VIAD Conoral Cushoul
Redatoressant of Fr. Francie D. Stevens.
fr.
re
1. It le requested this proved be given to rebut
Francis R, tevens of the Depart, ent of "tats for a trip to
P
Pelle, New York. This trip wurde et our request and with to
approval of the TEP and
to approach . Bethaniel Jazir
as a posɛib'e replacement for r. olkaare, head of the Division
for Exile folatiore of the National Committee for a Free Durch
2. NP. Clevens van acked to do this work: becuase of his close
personal friendship with Mr. Tovie. r. Stevene is als
the copbelty of a State Department contact with the National Commitles
For a free Aurope.
me
r.
3. in accounting of real onere in atister, The
airlino state, to bo aítached to my potter, are rele kept in this
(ffice, pending approval of Min rat, bl.
:
Approved:
Coneral Counsel
W. BRADEN
TIRAN
Chief
International Organisations Divizion
Deputy Procter (Revindstration)"
Attachments 1. (a/s)
SECRET
Security Information
1
10/Br.lib
Distributions
Addressce
-
Gen.Counsel
orig & 1
-> lce
10/Er.l 1cc-
CIO
-
-
1cc
RI - 1cc
IO/AD
- lec

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_343.jpeg ---
14-00000
į
2159
Security infanation
FEB 6. 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR 1
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
NCFE Support of the New Loader
REFERENCE:
Your Monorandum of 12 January 1953 (ER #3-6149),
same subject.
:
1. On 30 January, Saul Lovitas advised our PY Staff by tele-
phone that he find received a call from Spencer Phenix. According
to Levitas Mr. Phonix stated that NCFE has decided to provide the
New Leader with $18,000. $12,000 of this amount will be a direct
payment to the magazine for services and the remaining $6,000 will
be used to renew 1,000 subscriptions to the United Kingdom.
'
2. The PP Staff is preparing for your consideration a project.
separate from the above which would envisage sending subscriptions
to the New Leader to key Socialist and Labor people in certain
other priority aroas.
i
APP/ACU/LVm
31 January 1953 ·
Distribution:
Addressee
-
Orig & 1
Chief of Operations, DD/P - 1
Executive Registry.
CPY
-
1
CIO
-
✓
APP - 1
RI - 1
RICHARD HELMS
Chief of Operations, DD/P
SEBA
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_344.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
"
Em
Tema (DAY 2042)
3-6.15
3 February 1953.
My dear Mr. Dollarosal
"
I appreciate your letter and your interest. I
recall with pleasure our acquaintance during the
war and have noted your desire to serve the
"democratio cause".
Very sincerely yours,
(Signed) MICH W. Dudes
DUBLES
Mr. 3. DeBarcza
11, Rangor Road
Croydon
Nosolo
Sydney, Australia
CIO:TWB/mf (19 January 1953)
retyped 0/DDCI:REL/leb. (23 January 1953)
retyped 0/DDCI: AVD/mam (3 February 1953).
O/DDCILAND/m
Dist:
Orig
-
Addressco
1 co- DDCI Chrono
1 cc - ER
1 cc -
CIO ✓
1 cc - RI
1 cc - TONIC
1
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_345.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
SECURITY. INFORMAATION
MEMORANDUM FOR, Chief, TO Division
FROM
SUBJECT
• Chief, SE
"
· Viorel Virgil TILEA
Need
2726-53
Crepsent to Estern
what has
Lavre
This shows go to
Lung.
yes went to new
1. It is our understanding that Viorel TILSA is currently under
consideration for the position of head of Rumanian broadcasts for RFE.
In this connection wo call your attention to information in our filos
indicating (a) the ponsibility that Subject is a British Intelligence
agent; (b) that a close relationship exists between Subject and Nicolae.
MALAZA, the well-known Rumanian industrialist now in the United States,
and (c) that Subject has ties with former King CAROL. MALAXA is our-
rently under scrutiny not only by this Agency but by the FBI, the Bureau
of Immigration and Naturalization, the Department of Justice and the
House Judiciary Committee, for his alleged collaboration with King CAROL,
with the IRON GUARD and later, with the Rumanian Communist Government.
CAROL's activities are, of course, & matter of record.
2. Numerous usually reliable sources have indicated their belief
that TILFA is an agent of the British Intelligence Service. This opinion
appears to be held by many knowledgeable Rumanian emigres.
3. That Subject is definitely linked to Nicolae MALAXA is borne
out by the following:
B.
A report by the FBI on Nicolae MALAXA dated 20 October
1948 indicates that the following telephone calls were made on
MALAXA's own telephone in New Yorkı
D.C.
"March 20, 1948. Number called: District 3000, Wash.
Person called: V. TILFA, Mayflower Hotel. Viorel TILEA
is the former Rumanian Minister to the Court of St. James
who has been active in Subject's behalf.
"April 1, 1948. Incoming collect call from V. TILFA,
calling from Executive 7300, Hash. n.C.
"April 14, 1949. Telegram sent to London, Interna-
tional 575, signed VIOREL (VIOREL TILEA)..
"April 14, 1948. Telegram sent to Paris, Interna-
tional 550, signed TILEA.
:
SECOCT

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_349.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
.ī
:
IT
1
SEJUM
'
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
TO/TONIC
Call from Admiral pe
i
ĭ
2 February 1953
11. Wants to put Paul Kesten ✓
Please secure Security Clearance on
-
Foard has radio experience.
right away.
. Miller called Bill
answer. What do our
Ask Willa if she has
s
3. Ro Yugoslav publication which
Durkee about and has not vet repsied an
friends across the street think of 1-2
any dope on it. They have run 500 and are just
holding them
TWS:
1. Ellen will start the clearance on Pal Keston.
cleared back
in 1951
2. Bill Durkce took this up with es at State who
asked that we hold off until
poturned Yoslavia
and they got his views Filem talked with Stevens a couple days
azo on this and rather than say to read on the distribution
of these publications, he asked if we couldn't hold off a couple
more days until Amb. Allen returns. Stefold Sam Wilken this.
She has also had a letter from Dolbeare on it so everyone is after
her on this.
.
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_348.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
i
·
"Judging from opinions gathered here during the last weeks
Source is inclined to believe that General Nicolao RADESCU is
ready to repudiate the King. In much on action he would be
backed by the pro-CAROL clique Gheorghe RAUT, Prof. Nicoleo
HERESCH, Col. Cheorghe ILIESCU, Viorel TILEA, Coneral Ion.
Gheorghe."
5. A member of the National Peasant Party and supporter of fallu
MANTU, TILEA broke away from that group around 1935 to join Alezender
VAIDA-VOBVOD who founded the fascist RUMANIAN FRONT. VAIDA-TORVOD,
having aided CAROL in becoming dictator, became President of the NATIONAL
RENAISSANCE FRONT, the totalitarian party set up by CAROL in 1938. VITA-
VOEVON was an advocate of the "mumerus valahichus", an ultra-nationalist
policy aimed at limiting to 5% the number of Jews allowed to practise
professions or to attend universities. In 1938, according to this source,
who is considered usually reliable, TILEA became one of the mainstays
of the CAROL dictatorship. Another source, in referring to this eriod,
statos that TILEA who was then Under Secretary of State, acted as lia-
ison between VITA-POOD and the IRON GUARD.
6. A source evaluated as usually reliable stated that in late 1946
TILIM wrote to Alexander CRETGIANU requesting loan of 30,000 pounds from
the "resistance funds" in Switzerland which CETZIANU controlled. Spon
recelving CRETZIAMU's refusal, TILEA reportedly wrote to the latter that
it would be necessary, since he had not received the treatment to which
he believed he was entitled, "to revise his attitude (towards CRET ZIANT)
in future."
7. In the interests of expediency we have not made an exhaustive
search of the files for information on Subject at this time since this
would involve a considerable delay in forwarding information.
We are,
therefore, submitting the above in the form of an interim report for
your immediate consideration.
SEOPET
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_350.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
i
28 April 1953
MEMORAKTUM FOR: LIFECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIDENCE
SUBJECT:
:
Agenda for discussion with Menors. Ford, Brophy ot al.
BACKDEN) :
1. For your information, the following are current facts in
the American Heritage Foundation take-over of the Crusado for Freedom
8.
The American Heritage Youndation will undertake the
Crusade for Freedom subject to reconsideration after a period
of one year;
b. PRC has recommended the ous of $25,000 be granted the
American Heritage Foundation for its preliminary work;
Two CIA staff agante will be employed on the promises
of AFF -- an ecministrative assistant and a financial man.
AGENDA:
1.
2. In your discussions with Henry Ford and D'A. Brophy Wednesday,
I wonder whether you should make the following points:
3. The principal objectives of the AHF program are to provide
cover for NCPE-PRE and CFA through a miltiplicity of ostensible
sources of funds. Fund raising is a distinctly secondary objective.
b. For several reasons, cover fund-raising for the Committee
for a Free Asia should be carried on outside the Crusade for
Freedom activity. He may at some future dato wish to transfer the
fund-raising for the Committee for a Free Asia to some other organi-
sation. In any event, we do not want the Crusade name linked with
the Committes for a proe Asia.
c. The previous Crusade operations have been inefficiently
We know that
operated. It has cost a dollar to raise a dollar.
A will be run on a businesslike baria, as have Alf past operations.
3

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
SPORET
SECURITY INTONATION
26 November 1952
MNORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, FOLITICAL AND FRYCHOLOGICAL WARFANE
Results of debriefing of Czech Defector
SUBJECT
REFERENCES
Meno from Bob Joyco 17 Nov. 52, attacding Stato Cable
from Frankfort #813.
1. I am sure Fob Joyce will upon reflection not allow himself to
be troubled by the remarks of one Czech dofector to the State Department
Mission in Germany.
2.
These are the facts:
Radio Free Europe has been most careful in its handling
of the subject of liboration. They have not in the past nor
they now allow anyone to speak on the air of "literation now".
b.
Attached for your information is a detailed guidance on
this subject issued by Radio Free Europe policy which governs
all of their broadcasts.
0.
As an example of how careful hadio Free Europe is on
this subject, I did not use Mr. John Foster Dullest rocont
controversial campaign speech on the subject of liberation
bocause they believed that oven tough it was news and a state-
ment made by a responsible American, it might be misinterpreted
bolind the Curtain.
3. I think that Radio Free Europe has maintained excellent disci-
pline on this subject. You can imagine that it is under considerable
pressure from Iron Oirtain emigration to take the line of early ropo
for liberation in the prospect that in some way American public opinion
and world opinion might be thus committed to a policy of literation by
armed forca.
4. I would be glad to have you show tide memorandum to Mr. Joyes
if you care to do so. He should know that everyone is constantly on
the alert and carefully watching the problem in raise.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Cider
International Organisations Division
Attachment
Special Quidance.
dtd 2 Sept. 52
CIO: WPD-TWB/eh
SECURITY INFORMATION
1 cc - 10/TONIC
Orig & 1 - Addressee 1 cc -010
1 cc
-
FI

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_346.jpeg ---
i
1
14-00000
:
SECRET
MAY
INFORMATION
i
From the same report:
"Confidential Informant 1-3 advised the Bureau on May 11, 1948
that he had received information that among the members of the
Board of Directors of the Pumardan-American Economic Corporation
(Hote: This was set up by PALAKA) are Viorel TILEA and Grigore
GAFENCI.
"
From TILEA's own statements to the Bureau in the same report:
"...he (TILEA) could honestly say that MALAXA, in his opinion
and in the opinions of many Rumanians, is by far the best
Rumanian citizon. Mr. TIESA indicated that there nover had
been any question about the character of MALAKA and that no one
could level any chargon against him that would concern his char-
acter, morals or patriotism
Mr. TILEA stated that he was
very sympathetic towards MALAXA at the present time
•
.
.....
"
b. In the case of a ault brought before the Supreme Court,
County of New York, in November 1949, by Mircen A. GROSSU, formerly
employed by MALAXA, against the latter for recovery of certain funds,
the following was given as "Third Cause of Action",
"That on or about the 10th day of August 1948, at the
special instance and request of the defendant, and upon defen-
dant's promise to repay the plaintiff the sum of three thousand
(43,000.00) dollars, plaintiff paid to one Mr. V. V. TILFA, the
sum of three thousand (:3,000.00) dollars.
"That no part of the said sum of three thousand ($3,000.00)
dollars has been paid to plaintiff by defendant, although demand
therefor has been duly made.”
C. Another source is quoted as follows in March 1948,
"There is an important consideration which, in the minds
of some Rumanian political exiles, necessitates the greatest
caution concerning collaboration with TILEA. It is a well-
established fact that TILEA has close business connections
with MALAYA and is working hand in hand with him. As TILEA's
collaboration is of no interest for MALAXA from a businesa
point of view, it is clear that the strong ties which exist
between them are of another nature. It is obvious to Rumanians
abroad that TILEA should not be included in a Rumanian National
Committee."
4. Concerning TILEA's alleged ties with King CAROL, the following
references are taken from our files,
1
RECOFT

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_347.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
✓ ITY INFORMATION
8.
From a report dated 21 August 28th from the London office
of OSS:
"TILSA's Tree Runarians are also satisfied (with the now
developments in Brania) though more moderately. They too ars
for MICHAE and MASTU but they suspect Russian intrigue to be
responsible for the latest changes. The fact that ex-Xing
CAML has expressed his satisfaction is also gratifying for
them sincs several of TILA's men have not given up the hope
of bringing CAROL Lack to Rumania. They have maintained a
correspondance with the ex-King, and they would have much to
expect from him if he came back to poser. TILEA a followers
are likewise very pleased with the fact that most of the men
forming the new Lovement are of the same political color as
themselves. They are almost all farmer King CAROL favorites
and good friends of some of the members of the Free fàɩmanian
movement
b. From an OSS report addressed to Mr. Allen W. Dulles from
"B.C." cated 5 May 1942:
#Rezarding the Romanian diplomat who is expected to arrive in
New York (as per my recent memorandan) to take over the leader-
ship of the Rumanian movement here, informants believe
that he is Mr. Worel TILPA, the man who started the Froe
Rumanian movement England. The itish are said to have
looked upon him with disfavor. He is a friend of King CAROL
and of TJA. It is reported that P. TILA is to enter
the United States via Mexico and it is believed that he may
already there conferring with (LL.”
c.
From a report by Evil GHILERAN £ 1948;
"PAYILA misht be watered down to the point where he is accept-
able to the Political Parties, but ever TILIA, who is a King
CAROL man."
•
:
d. From a report dated 1951, evalused as B-3, from a London
source, concerning the activities of uber Vasile LEU, the discredited
Rumanian emire priest who has set himself up as a bishop:
"From Istanbul LW intends to visit Ex MTHAT, to request the
episcopal crosier. This plan seems have been worked out by
L50 and vue. Elena DTPRSCU. Former ling CAROL will apparently
finance L's bishopric. . . Informant rained the impression
that LST's plans are supported by Merel TILEA and Major
Cheorghe ILIESCH.
From a report, evaluated as B-3, eoming from Paris in
November 1950,
1
-3-
SECRET
1
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_353.jpeg ---
14-00000
-2-
5. To have an annual audit by a firm to be designated by the
Fund.
6.
%
:
To Exorcise management and operational authority within the
framework of policy guidance provided by the Fund. The
primary objective of the fund-raising activities is to pro-
vido a multiplicity and variety of plausible, attributable
courcon of funda, The secondary objective is to raise as
large a sum of money annually as is feasible and consistent
with the above purpose.
"
Provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding will subse-
quently be more specifically detailed and my be amended by
mutual agreement between the Fund and the Foundation.
Vato
FUND
Pate
FOUNDATION
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_352.jpeg ---
14-00000
Tontative Memorandum of Understanding.
between Fund and the Foundation
Subject to the specific understanding that the Fund shall at all
times have authority to veto either in part or as a whole eny fund
raising or other activities that the Foundation may desire to undertake
in its conduct of the Fund's campaign, and equally that the Fund may
Pequest that specific action or actions be taken, the Fund agroes:
1. To provide funds for Foundation's overload and maintenance
of a basic staff.
2.
That Foundation should continue its normal fund-raising
activities, but such activition other than provided for in
1 above and 3 below cannot be financed by the Fund.
3. To approve, by June 1 of each year, a campaign budget for
the next fiscal year beginning 1 July, terminating 30 June
of the next year.
4. Subject to Fund's budgetary review and policy guidance, to
vost in the Foundation management and operational authority
over the public fund-raising activities.
5. to designate a competent liaison officer through whom Yund-
Youndation relations will be raintained.
6. To provide an administrative assistant and a fiscal officer
to work on Foundation premises.
7.
To provide thorough fiscal and other procedures.
8. To define and provido a liquidation reserve acceptable to
the fund and Foundation should relations be terminated.
The Foundation agrees1
1. To submit by May 1 each year its budget for the next fiscal
year following that date.
2. Hot to undertake other fund-raising activities which would
conflict wit the terms and purposes of this Memorandum of
Understanding.
3. To observe procedures as provided by the Fund.
4. To employ Fund-choson administrative assistant and fiscal
officer to work on Foundation Dremises.
"

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_351.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2
:
d.
We want a dignified operation which will enlist the
While we
support of representativo groups and individuals,
are interested in securing real contributions from the public
for the Crusade, the Crusade's primary purpose is serve as
a cover. It was and is intended therefore that its tenor be
educational dignified presentation to the American public
of events behind the Iron Curtain and a request for the public's
support of NCFE/RFE offorts to give aid and hope to the satellite
peoples.
We request that before further funds are authorized,
a memorandum of understanding along lines of the attached be
signed by both parties. (Your attention is invited to the!
provision requiring two CIA staff agents assigned to AHP staff).
Attachment
Draft Memo of Understanding
10/BrI: WPD-TWB/eh
(signed) in
THOMAS W. BRADZI
Chief
International Organisations Division
=
Orig
1 cc
->
DUI (TANU DR/P)
→
IO/Br I
IO/Br II
1 cc
1 cc
-
CIO
-
RI
-
1 cc
ICC-CPP

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_355.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
F
:
FBI- Aup's 1.1
:
State Dept. crisiduation
Further
31 Jan 53
iquiices revolució ink
O'Courel - 2591
Mr. Braden:
Ellen says a clearance has been in since / Dec 1952 on Allen Michie.
Nothing has been done in Security on it and possibly they can get to it next
week. O'Connel on 2591 is the one handling it.
FBI made a check on him in Aug 51 and found some rather decoratory info.
State was considering him for employment and dropayed it because of FBI chock.
Do you want to call Long and tell him clearance has not been secured yet?
:
:
¡

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_354.jpeg ---
14-00000
HOURLY BROADCASTING BREAKDOWN
Original Programming Hours
Total Broadcast Time
Language
Weekdays Sundays
Weekdays Sundays
Czechoslovakia
11
11 3/4
19 7/12 16 7/12
Hungarian
9 1/2
10
16 3/4
16 7/12
:
Polish
65/6 6 5/6
16 5/6
16 3/4
Rumanian
1 1/2
1
3
Bulgarian
1 1/2
1
Albanian
1/2
1/2
2 3/4
3.
4
2 3/4
1 1/4 1 1/4
:
30 5/6 31 1/12
60 1/3
56 11/12
Program Dept. Personnel
->>
N.Y. (Total)
-111
(Free Lance not Included)
Munich (Total) -468
-579

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_356.jpeg ---
14-00000
n
1
!
1
i
SECRET
(then Filled lay
DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE
SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT
VOA. Renny Project:
4.2. Assistance
7
• Assist in for affiance
ANALYST
DATE PROCESSID
DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
RI FILE NO.
SOURCE DUC. SYMBOL NO.
DATE
DISPAT
"STATE FEST No. 4.54.
7. SOURCE
10. DISSEMINATED IN
DATE OF INFO.
DATE
EVALUATION
DOCUMENT DISPOSITION
--
12. CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE
12. TRANSFERRED TO
RI FILE NO.
PERTINENT INFORMATIRM
THIS REFERS TO A TO SEPPET DOCUMENT
FILED
i
'
TROL
SECTION BY TS # 85340.B
FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.
FORM
867 USE PREVIOUS
TIONS.
1
i
SECRET
(7-46}
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_358.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
between the various refuges elsmants but would also have
the full support of all Garmins, Booker added."
Incidentally, I think you are doing an aufully good job on this
kind of thing. The other night I actually read through an antiro,
copy.
The article on music for the masses and the general axpose of
the attack on the arts is particularly significant, I think. Until
the recent anti-Semitism, this field of culture is the one field of
Soviet activity in which they were vulnerable before neutralists and-
fellow-travelers everywhere. The tendency of the intellectual to
swallow the Soviet line on culture, to fall for the Stalin Prizes,
the high status accorded the obedient intellectual in Soviet society,
7 and pseudo-scientific appeal of the Marrian dogma of equality is
dangerous. In a free society, the intellectual is the origin of
ideas.
.
Anything we can do to show the fact that every aspect of Soviet
culture has been transformed into an instrument of the State, that
the intellectual's rola is important only so long as he is obedient,
that in fact the product of the Soviet artist would not hold a candle
to the standards set by fellow-traveling circles in Westam Surope,
and that the Soviet has corrupted the crinciples of equality on which
it presumes to stand is terribly important.
I am sure you are aware of all the above but I thought of it
when I read the piece in the last issue, and my comment is just
another way of telling you what a good job I think you are doing.
Dr. David Powers
New York, New York)
CIO:TWB/sh
Orig
-
Addressee
1 cc - Leonard Stamm
1. cc
->
TONIC
1 cc - CIO
1-00
-
RI
Sincerely,
Oliver Harwood
!
}
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_361.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
UNCLASSIFIED (RESTRICTF
.
WILDER CLA.
CONFIDENTIAL
ATION TOP AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
TO
1
2
C.IQ
3
4
5
:
FROM
Chief, PBID
2
3
_ APPROYAL
ACTION
COMMEAT
☐ ☐ ☐
☐ CONCURRENCE
C
REMARKS:
SECRET
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
SECRET
INITIALS
DATE
CST/21
DUB
INITIALS DATE
800
A 28 for
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
PREPARATION OF REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
☐ ☐
SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
FILE
The attached them carrier reference to
CD and vn jublished in the Restricted
HR Daily Resort.
d.
This distribution is made to DB/P; /I;
; Chief, PP; Chief, Intelligence
Control Branch, OCI; AD/00; General Counsel;
and Col. Wood, I & S.
CONFIDENTIAL (
RESTRICTED
UNCLASSIFIED
30.4
:
!
i
"
:
I
1
I
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_357.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
Dear David:
¡
Trely refer to:
25 January 1953
1
7
You may be interested in a dispatch which I received here a
couple of days ago and which I quote as follows:
i
"On January 14, Alexander Booker of the German Foreign Office
informally brought to our attention a map of Eastern Europe
which appeared in the December issue of "News from Behind the
Irac Curtain", a monthly periodical published by the "National
Committee for a Free Europe". This map which is shown in
small scale on page 1 of this periodical, shows all of Eastern
Germany, including East Prussia, the Satellite States, and the
former Baltic States, In the case of the former German terri-
tories east of the Oder-Heisse line, the area is simply shown
as belonging to Poland, and its pre-war borders are not sot
off by a dotted line. With respect to Poland, Czechoslovakia
and Fomania, however, the territories that were annexed by
the Soviet Union during or after World War II are clearly
marked by a dotted line. Furthermore, the Eastern Zone of
Germany as well as East Prussia are shown in the same colors
as the Soviet Union, whereas the Baltic and Satellite States
are shown in white.
"Although Booker admitted that the man itself was not of great
importance, he nevertheless pointed out that it represents
'a typical example of the one-sided anti-German propaganda'
put it not only by the National Committee for a Free Europe
but also by Radio Free Europe. Sack propaganda, he said, can
only increase the misgivings which many Germans, particularly
the refugees, already entertain with respect to the activities
of the committee and on the operations of Radio Free Europe on
German soil. Finally, Booker politely hinted that the German
Government would welcome it if the U. S. High Commission would
use its influence with the National Committee for a Free Europe
to stop dissemination of such anti-German propaganda in the
future. A more constructive and objective propaganda policy
of the committee and Fadio Free Eurme along the lines of a
Large: Suropean Community that would embrace Poland and Czecho-
alovania as well as a reunited Germany and the other European
nations would not only contribute to a better understanding
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_359.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
Live
!
:
profil
le
sing neck
Non amely
saan't.
SECRET
Security Inforination
27 January 1953
MEMORANDITE FORT CHIP, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION
SUBJECT'S
Exploitation by RIFE of Physicians (Plot)
1. Attached herewith the January 17 Washington Post Editorial on
"Communist Antisemitism", which you requested.
2. This editorial has not been previously sent to New York.
However,
I should like to call your attention to the fact that the material covered
in this editorial has already been exploited by RE, as ovidenced in their.
guidances of 13, 14 and 15 January.
Attachments
As stated above
1
ELLEN STERN.
10/TONIC
Tuk wrote bls. to Lang so Jan 53
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_360.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1
!
i
SECRET
Security Information
TO
1
· Deputy Director (Plans)'
1
FROM
$
Comptroller
:
26 January 1953
SUBJECT: Additional Funds for Crusade for Freedom
1
1.
Reference is made to memorandum dated 15 January 1953
from Chief, PP to the DD/P and to the memorandum of 8 January
1953 for the DD/CI submitted by the Chief, 10 Division wherein
request is made for additional funds of $553,109 for the
Crusade for Freedom.
2. On 24 January 1953 a representative from this office
discussed and reviewed the basis for the request for additional
funds with officials of the Crusade for Freedom. The following
unaudited amounts were presented for review:
An operating bank account overdraft
Unpaid invoices on hand
Unpaid Commitments for the 1952 campaign
Total bank overdraft, unpaid invoices and
commitments to 21, January 1953
$19,802.67
106,106.03
123,294.03
$248,502.73
The Crusade officials have estimated that in addition to the above
$248,502.73 a further amount of $18,000 will be required for
expenses to close out the 1952 campaign.
3. It is recommended that the $253,000 approved by the PRC,
21 January 1953 be made available to the Crusade for Freedom from the
allotment to the DD/P area for the fiscal year 1953. The use of un-
vouchered funds is recommended.
:
!
I
i
Enumbers
E. R. SAUNDERS.
approved for wha
Micha
Acting so/P
SECRET 27 January
dienmay 153.
Security Information
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_36.jpeg ---
14-00000
KYES ONLY
SECRET
25 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chiof, P & P
SUBJECT:
Talk with Mr. Robert Lang
1. I spent an hour and a quarter in New York on Friday,
14 November, with Mr. Robert Lang of Radio Free Europo. The major
partion of this time was devoted to a briefing by Lang of the NCFE
structure and the position which RFE occupion in it, including the
philosophy of RFE operations. Lang gave an impressive performance
and struck me on such short acquaintanco as an individual of ability,
judgment, and energy.
2. Mr. Lang made quite a point of the fact that his operation
inside NCFE is virtually independent. He intimated that he receives
no guidance from the President or other officers and has exponded
considerable effort; in the past seeing to it that an iron curtain is
kopt between RFE and the top command of [CFE. Ho said that if RFE
had not developed and expanded according to a philosophy which it
itself had originated, it would have got nowhere and would still be
frustrated by what he kept referring to as the "old State Department
line" as exemplified by the views of Devitt Poole, Fred Dolbeare,
and others. He then pointed out that he had received virtually no
guidance, policy or otherwise, from this organization. Also he
claimed to suffer from lack of contact with us. Ho stated that when
ho saw Mr. Dulles a week or so ago, it was the first time he had¨.
talked to anyone in authority here in many a moon. As far as
Hr. Braden and company are concerned, he said that they dealt largely
with Admiral Millor and his immediate staff. It was clear that ho
would prefer to deal directly with Washington. He also feels in-
hibited by the fact that he has to cajolo Admiral Filler into per-
mission to come to Washington. ho cited as evidence an incident re-
cently when he felt obliged to ask a friend in the State Department to
intercode with Admiral Miller to permit him to come down hare for
consultation.
3. There was nothing bitter or frustrated in Mr. Lang's re-
marks. Father he struck me as an individual who was discussing the
facts of life, be miat they may.
:
4. I told him that I would discuss with you the wisdom of
having him como down here for a day some time in the next week or so
SECRET
:
SECURIT
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_362.jpeg ---
14-00000
RESTRICTED
-
HI! 4
HE
HUNGARY
Jun. 26, 1953
..\
i
. : '
A
'JOINT' ONLY ONE OF U.S. SPY TENTACLES
Budapest, Hungarian Home Service, Jan. 23, 1953, 1900 GMT--L
(Commentary by Ful Londval)
(Summery with Quotations)
In the report carried by an "American bourgeɔts weekly" the name of the
bankor Warbing was included among several philanthropic .. businessmen.
Varburg was described on one of the most zoulous among them. The adjoc-
tive would have been truly art if applied not to Warburg's philanthropic
activities but to his business activitioc.
"In the history of American capitalism we have hoard of many a ohrowd and
bone businessmen, but row have been more cunning or more ready for any
and every wi skedness than Worburg. By prolongion he ta a banker--and not
la
Just any second-or third-rate upeculator, but a member of Kuhn, Loeb,
mond Company, the second largout, banking firm in the United Staton.»
At the same time, the in olas chuirman of Joint, the Zionist Jewish
bourgeois-nationalist orgonization.
"It will be remembered that the Joint has been, to the accompaniment of
the eulogies of the bourgesio press, acting for yourn under a philanthropie
dioguise and with the alleged purpose of providing financial nid to Jews
in Europe and other countries.
"In reality this organization--as revealed by the flansky trial and the
Case of the group of doctor-wreckors unmaked in the USSR--hae served as
a forward base of American imperialism and has carried out, under the
direction of the U.S. cnpionage service; spying, terrorist, and sabotage
activition against the USSR and the People's Democracies.
Birda of a feather flock throther:
Joint to given away by the identity
of the man heading it. Mr. Warburg, donning the robe of the philanthropiot
and placing himself in the role of savior of the Jew, has been the bosom
friend and business partner of the West German banker Pferdomengou, ɔno
of Hitler's former financiere and advisers, one of the wickedent Nazl
war criminala.
"Warburg, the Zionist leader, and Pfordomonpes, "the Hitlerite, have
Jointly Pounded with vest initial capital a banking firm in Hamburg,
the most important investment in West Germany of Ruhn; Lreb, and
Company.
**
1
1
:
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_365.jpeg ---
14-00000
Y
;
7
1
!
|
1953 BUDGET
Radio Free Europe (operating expenditures
Total RFE
(capital
nditures)
$ 9,526,302.00
2,981,120.00
$12,507,422.00
National Committee for a Free Europe
Operating Expenditures
National Committee for a Free Europe
Capital expenditures
Total NCFE
Free Europe University in Exile
Operating Expenditures
Capital
Total FEUE
GRAND TOTAL
Reserve for Centingency
(to be held by NCFE)
To be held by sponsor
TOTAL BUDGET
1
SECRET
Security Information
2
3,774,517.00
NONE
3,774,517.00
623,631.00
6,000.00
I
634,631.00
$16,916,570.00
100,000.00
1,783,430.00
$18,500,000,00
I
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_363.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
I
RESTRICTED
-
· HH. 5.
-
HUNGARY
Jan. 26, 1953
"Thio suing "arburg who, with one hand, scribbles humanistic and charity
appeale linio pocketed with the othor--no a chief shareholder ɔ I.G.
Farbonindustrie--rich dividends resulting from the manufacture of pɔlsɔn
gan (or to Auschwitz doath camp, where several million people, includ-
ing many hundreds of thousands of June, were killed. This name
arburg who proncheu about helping the victims at the war is one of tho
main architects of the cold war and, with the golden rain of dollaro
he helps to net on its feet again the bloodthiraty and money-hungry German
Imperialium.
'
"Euch in the likenora of philanthroplets for whom every life extinguished,
every bomb dropped means the clinking of gold. Under the expert direc-
tion of Mr. Warburg, the principal tank of Joint has beon spying and the
organization or subotage for the overthon of the People's Democratic
regimeu. This won the organization which directed the base activities of
the doctor-wrecker and gave instructions for the extermination of the
leading cadrés of the Soviet Union. At the anme time, however, it does
not look with contempt upon currency deals and black marketeering or
muggling. Spying and sabotago have proved excellent business aloɔ.
Through the llegal emigration movement in Czechoslovakia, for instance,
Joint madon profit of 9 dollars for every dollar invested.
The damage
which thene urtminala have caused the Czechoslovak People's Republic
would have covored the costs of 20,000 room flats or 177,000 car loads of
wheat."
Joint, though Important, to by no means the only espionage and terror
organization of American imperialism. The U.S. Government long ago
mado on institutional and an official governmental activity of the
organization of cooninations and acts of terror. The Mutual Security
Act providca 100 million dollars for the recruitment into armed formations
of "war criminal and other criminals, who fled from the USSR and the
People's Dembernales," for action against their countrice of origin.
1
Since the end of the World War Two the war incendiaries have been'
tenaciously and systematically building up their interwoven and world-
embracing capionage notwork." The oum total invested for the purpose is
far in excess of the amount stipulated in the Mutual Security Act.
'The Swiss paper DIE TAT cotimates the annual operating costs of the
Central Intelligence Agency, employing 6,500 permanent and tenu of
thousands of temporary apies, at 300 million dollars.
:
i:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_366.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
i
i
|,
SECRET
Security Information 26 January 1953
MEMORANDUM POR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION
SUBJECTS.
REFERENCE:
Meeting of Poles to be held here in February
Memorandum on same subject frm CIO to 10/Branch I, dated
23 January 1953
Th
1. RCFI has confirmed that a meeting of ambassadors and diplomats of the
Polish Government in Exile is to be held here in the middle of February,
2. The following individuals are scheduled to attend the meetings
I
8.
Ambasendors
Papec,.
Potocki.....
Ambassador to the Vatican
.....Atascador to Madrid
Antregador to Lebanon
Zenczykowski.
b. Agento
Morawski.
Raczynski
Rabinski
...Paris
London
Ottowa
c.
Lipski..
Arciszewski.
Combinski,
Others
Hashington
::
!
Muenos Aires
...Cabal
1
Homer......
Librach.
Ciechanowski.
Montreal
Secretary-General of the Foreign
Office of the Government in Exile,
coring from London
.Former Ambangalor to Washington
Wszelaki......
(until 1945)
I
Former Consul to the Embassy in
Washington (until 1945)
3. The purpose of the meeting is to discuse and decide matters concerning
the foreign policy of the Government in Exile. ECPE has heard rumors, but does
not know for a fact, that the Poles intend to pay their respects to the new
Administration. If this should be done, General Sosnkowski (who is returning
from Canada at the end of this week) would be the spokesman, since he knows
Eisenhower personally.
4. NCPE is in no way involved in sponsoring or financing this meeting.
The Polish Government in Exile has funds of its own which should enable it to
send delegates.
SECRET
Security
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
Chief, 10/TONIC
Į
1
1
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_367.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
i
7
23 January 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: IO/BRANCH 1 Mica Ellen Stera
SUBJECT:
Moeting of Poles to be held here in February
1. John Bresa telophoned me late today to inquire whether
SC72 knows anything about a meeting of a group of Poles in the
Polish Government in Exilo to be held in February. Bokolowsky'?)
was mentioned as a member of this group, and it is their intention
to meet with Polos from South America, and pay their respects to
the now Administration.
2. The Embassy in London is concerned about visas for these
Poles and Bob Joyce has asked John Bross whether we are giving any
encouragement to this proposed meeting.
3. Will you find out from KCFE what they know about this?
arb/eh
-
-
Addresses
CO Tonic file
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
YORMATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_368.jpeg ---
14-00000
23 January 1953
MEMORANDUM POR: CHIEF, IO BRANCH I
SUBJECT:
Use of RFE as Playback in avant of hostilities
1. I believe you held some conversations with the Communications
people about Spencer Phenix's idea, which he expressed to me, that
RFE might be used as a playback in the event of hostilities. Will
you let me know the results of those conversations, whether our
Communications people think it is possible or not possible, and in
general what their ideas are.
2. Spencer Phenix has been asking me about this for reasons
which you know, and I think we ought to give him some kind of a
definite answer.
t
CIO:TWB/ch
Orig
1 cc
-
4.
C/10/Br2
CTO
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
ST
N
i
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_364.jpeg ---
T
14-00000
:
j
RESTRICTED
:
-
HH 6 -
HUNGARY
Jan. 26, 1953
"That ngony wan recently given a new chief, following the resignation of
Gen. Pedell Smith, with the appointment a few days agɔ ɔf Allen Dullou,
the brother of the new Secretary of State, the Immediate director of the
gecret war against the USCH and the People'a Dumperacion, the recruiting
officer of the Rajke, Szoonylu, Elannkyn, and thor traitors of the Bino
brund.
"The central emplonage organization embracen geveral bodieso activo in
apping and diversion and campurlaged with impreunive numce, the
espionage panization known on the National Committee for a Free
Europe being one of the many maintained with 1.S. dollars and directing
Its own brauch organisations all over Europe. That committen, too, hao
been headed by llen fullen, and its members have included Prostdent
Elsenhower, Gon. Clay, and representatives of the yellow trade unione and
of "all troet."
That committeo has been the motive force behind the various national
committeen, Including the one lod by "proven traitoru liko Forene Nugy,
Mikolajeryk, and their agentes." In Straubourg and other places
coptona lino boon given a betontific standing at univoraition, together
with various methode of incendiorism and unnunination. The "Green
International" in alas one of the committon'a branchen, allied to the
gang of the Interiotional usum of landlords deprived of their entatus.
'It is but a few months ago that the Czechoslovak State Security organs
unmsaked a terrorist group belonging to the International emplonage
organization. The outbursts of fury of the ImperialJut 1[e-m:«nufacturers,
their wailings, the anlvoca of rage coming from the bourgeois politicians,
are proofs in thommelven that the exposure of the undercover Joint
agencies, the recent liquidation of American spy and terrorist groups
In Bulgariu and Poland hua touched the organizers of a new war to the
quick.
'According to dota not quite complete, in the part year alone 41
Amerlesh spy groups and terrorist organizations have boun liquidated
in the USSR and the People's Democracies. We must be prepared for the
time when the enemy, precisely because of the now blow aufered by him,
will try to harm us by even viler means
We must always remember Stalin's wise words to the affect that a long
as there to capitalism around us, there will be wrockers, diversionist
spice, and terrariots sent by foreign countries to stab the Soviet
Union in the back. Let us therefore fight with even greater vigilance,
let un fight even more implacably against the enemy's attempts to pre-
vent, by subotage and subversion, the building of focieliem.
frustration of his plans depends upon us and upon our vigilance."
The
.
:
:
1.
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_37.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFRAN
-
2
-
in order to spend a couple of hours around a table with Tracy
Barnes, Al Ulmer, Eric Tima, and other appropriate individuals, at
which bession he would have an opportunity to got forth his problemo
and invite whatever assistance we as an organization can provide.
5. After you have read the foregoing, I would like to talk
with you and Mr. Bradon for the purpose of pussing on DD/?'e reactions
to my suggestion.
cc: Chief, 10
ut
Richard Helms
Acting Chiof, Operations, DDP
SECRET
SECURITY INTERNATION
1
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_369.jpeg ---
14-00000
in Brown
MEMORANDUM POR: Chi-f, 10
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Plunt C10 forfile
16906
vrigt sicher
22 Jan
27 January 1953
(Haller)
Chief, PI/Plann/Cover
Comtenia concerning Crusade for Europe
1. In December 1952 Mr. Reichhardt discussed with your divi-
sion contact made by /C representatives with Mr. Buckner of Gone-
ral Motors in Detroit is regard to General Motors' contributions
to the Crusado of Preetas. Mr. Buckner recently reported to CC/C
the following information.
2.
Suzanne LaFollette, Managing Editor of the Preeman Maya-
sino, New York, recently wrote a letter to Mr. Jordan c
Geral
Carton Company, Pattle Greek, Michiyen, in which she criticized
the Crusade for Freedox. She stated, chong other things, that the
promoters of the Crusado are a "bunch of micro liberals and do not
know anyt: ing about reacting iron curtain countries",
3. The lotter is reported to have been turned over to the
Battle Creek newspaper, Equirer, but iis contents have not yet
been published.
4.
According to Mr. Buckner, LaFollette's comments have cur-
tailed offorts to solicit funds for the Crusade and he fears that
this tyre of information zit reach other city groups.
CECURITY LUNATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_372.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: PRC Meeting
For Bill Durkce
1 1952
1. Today the PRO approved $253,000 for the Crusade for Freedom,
the money to be held in escrow and to be paid out on Frank Wisner's
signature subsequent to an audit by a CTA auditor who will go over
the Crusade's books and account to us for the reliability of the
Crusade's estimate of $253,000 to wind up the affair this year.
2. PRC set aside the request for $300,000 for next year's
campaign on the grounds that the Arency should first settle matters
with the Heritage Foundation and start clean on a Heritage Founda-
tion estimate.
.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_373.jpeg ---
14-00000
2611
1
:
C
weld
toit d
di
may thing need
i
19
qui
4/
in ravy bad 4x4 skirt in epail
64
they
-elus
1151
mpt
2011
ww
Nis then ware
1732,478 (7900)
221
1950
117000
()
mecept

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_371.jpeg ---
14-00000
Security Information
MEMORANDCH POP,
DELUTY DIPECTOR (PL/NC)
SUBJECT:
Craft NCFP Policy Statement
26 January 1953
1, Attached is a draft NCFF Policy Statement which has been
reviewed and accepted by the Executive Committee of NCFF, but which
was sent to us without the knowledge of Admiral Filler and therefore
should probably not be commented on by you to any of our friends in
New York unless you have also received a copy from another source.
Admiral Hiller probably intends to sent us this statement after it
has been proved by the Board of Directors.
2. You may wish to compare it with the old ice-box statement
now in effect, also attached.
3. You may also wish to note Part I, paragraph 2 in which
mantion is made of government surport. It is apparently the intent
of NCFF to make this statement not an ice-box statement, but a public
document and if so, I think you ought to make particularly certain
that you arprove this part of it.
4. Finally, I think you will want to cote the general tenor of
Part III. Perhaps I am quibbling, but it seems to me a trifle full-
blown. I realize that NCFF is a seperate government agency just
under cabinet status, but this reads a little bit as though it wore
putting on the trappings of national sovereignty.
Attachments
As stated.
CIO: TWB/mf
Distribution:
Orig
1 cc
-
Thre
Addressee (CPP)
-
CIO
1 cc - RI
1 cc - IO Brl
THOMA W. BRADFN
Chief
International Organizations Division
:
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_370.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Security Information
Statements
1
22 January 1953
N
santh. Do/P
22 Jan
1, our friends in Now on have inforce that obert Vogeler
Cave a toll at the sorentu Athletic in Chicco on 13 anary 1753
on the abject of payoiological marfare,
•
$
7. In the course of his of rose be reportedly repied 89
broadcasting nothing but cole, tanelell scores an "jonk."
qpted b
vau an organisation ordinally fored with private
capital beca te of diseasiicction with ba Lowever, it ran out of
money because the public failed to support it and a povrate loan
WED.de which 21
in
Since
has becara guilty of the ammo al of poor programming that a tractorizes
VAo
I
.
P friends are and
...
down a complete report of to speech.
They feel that none fort of actior should be to: on to stor Pobert "opelor
from catinuing to the such r
indef,/inic
SECRET
Telaformation
Ducks Memo 13Jan sent to
TONIC, Rec Chrono.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_375.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
KEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
EUEJECT:
Crusade for Freedom
21 January 1953
Per telephone conversation from Mr. Derkee on 21 Jamary 1953, the
Following was stated:
"Returns are $600,000. These are returns in central banks. Other
returns reported but not in central banke. This brings the total
up close to $1,000,000. Twenty-one states have yet to report in."
SECRET
Security In
1
>

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_374.jpeg ---
14-00000
TRANSMITTAL SLI
21 January 1953
DATE
TO:
Mr. Braden
BUILDING
K
REMARKS:
ROOM NO
1030
Mr. Durkee asks "to have you ask
Joan to tell Dorkis"
Trust you know what this means!
FROM:
10/Tonic
BUILDING
K
ROOM NO
1402
EXTENSION
8086
FORD NO.
SEP 1946
38-8

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_377.jpeg ---
14-00000
scurity Information
· 2 ·
Crusade Campaign, no action should be taken on Achiral Miller's proposals,
However, it is recommended that a sum of $300,000 be made available for the
remainder of the fiscal year 1953, to be drawn upon by the DIR, to finance
such activities as mar do reconnary tó transfer the direction of the 1953
Crusade Campaign to the American Heritage Foundation and to prepare the be
ginnings of that Campaign.
2. Should the American Heritage Foundation decide against taking over the
Crusade Campaign for 1953, the present Crusade organization will have to again
be reoxumined with policies and financing decided,
C. Recommendations.
1. It is therefore recommended that the sum of $253,108.92 be made
available to the 1952 Crusade for Freedom for the remainder of fiscal year
1953.
2° That $300,000 be allotted to be used on the authority of the DDP in
the transfer to, and start of a 1953 Campaign by the American Heritage Foundation
in the fiscal year 1953.
:
Thomas W. Braden
Houses
TEMAS W, BRADEN
Chief.
International Organisations Division
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_376.jpeg ---
14-00000
iris ration
--
8 January 1953
MEDIORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
VIAI Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT:
Chief, Political and Psychological Warfare
Additional Funds for the Crusade for Freedom
:
A
Puziu requested for termination of 1952 campaign.
1.
Adriral Miller has requested a sum of $261,106.92 for the 1952 Campaign
of the Granado for Freedom.
2. From April 1, 1952, the starting date of the 1952 campaign, the Crusade
for Proctor has had available to it $550,760.81. of this amount, a total of
$106,239.81 uns cash on hand as of April 1, 1952, and returns of cash from the
field to headquarters after that date, Shu,528.00 of the amount were CIA con-
tributions to the 1952 Campaign, Actual expenses of the Crusado from April 1
through December 20, 1952, were $473,439.33, Available cazh as of that data as
359,328.43. Expected additional expenses will be $330,437.35. Additional faris
of 3261,105.7% are thus requested, Not included in the figure of cash on hand as
of Decanter 20, 1957, are the funds in & payroll revolving uscount of 30,000,
These Ards can be deducted from the total requested if a decision is made that
the present Crusade organization is to be terminated and transferred to the
Anerican Heritage Foundation,
3. Total expenditures of the 1952 Campaign will this total $803,866.73. IS
should be noted that of this amount $35,928.66 was spent to clear up remaining
1951 Curtain expenses, leaving e not of $767,938.07 expended on the 1952
Campaign
4. A comparison of the total cost of the 1951 Campaign with that of the
Compeism conducted in 1952 clearly shows that the instrictions of the PRC that
the Crusade to scaled down in arount was complied with:. Total expenditures
during the 1951. Campaign were $1,932,475, while total expenditures this year
will be 1767,938.07, This year's expenditures are also lead than those of the
initial Cerpaign of 1950 when expandies were $917,000. Receipts in 1950 s
$1,317,000, while receipts in the 1951 Campaign wore 32,011,221.94.
5. Cetailed statements attached. (Tab A) (Note particularly itan 3 which
comparer field expenson between 1951 and 1952 Compaigns)
B. 1953 Comonign.
This
1, Attached (Tab B) horeto are Admiral Miller's proposals for a 1953
Urusada u paign. He has requested & of $830,000 for this purpone,
$830,000 iɛ an addition to the cum requested above for the termination of the
1952 Campaign. In view of the request of the Director of the Central Intelli-
gence Mancy that the American Heritage Foundation take over and run the 1953
SECRET
Security inferation

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_378.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECURITY JEFONATION
SUBHANZ OF FUNDS HEIDED
-
December 23, 1952
Total Cash Received.
Less Payroll Revolving Account
Exps 12 April 1, 1952 thru 12/20/32
$550,767.81
0,000.00
$542,767.81
473.439.38
$ 69,328.43
Available Cash
1952 Meld Budget
9747,585.00 (Sue #3 Tab A
for breakdown)
Spent
1
November
80,203.60
- December
Advancen to Field
1952 field Content
51,39.05
244.250.00
72,547.65
$175,037.35
Ad Coungal
"
25,000.00
Compaign Printing
100,000.00
Payroll last half of December Comand tent
10,000.00
Telephons Charge November
R
1,700.00
:
December
"(estimated)1,700.00
Airlino
"
November
3,500.00
11
!
December
*
Miscellaneous Hdqs.p.
3,500.00
10,000.00
Fluxls Heeded
33307137.35
$330,437.35
$261,103.52
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
77B
A

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_380.jpeg ---
14-00000
1951
STATE
ALABAKA
APIZONA
FEES NO
SALARIES
EXPENSES
8
562.00
8 1,777.08
3,985.31
FIELD EXPENSES
TOTAL
$ 2,339.08
December 10, 1952
2253
PEES AND
EXPENSES
TOTAL
SALAPIES
$1000.
450.
1750
4,586,81
1000.
750.
1750
ARKANSAS
555.00-
75392:55
75947-55
12757
1750.
3025.
CALIFORNIA, NO.
11.275.00
12,886.15
24,161.15
4000.
60070.
100005.
SO.
21,050.00
16,623.63
37,673.69
4000.
6000.
10,000.
COL RADO
$200.00
14,085.67
20,085.87.
2000.
4375.
COCTICUT
6,151.65
6375.
7.215.06
13,366.71
1000.
DELAWARE
500.
1500
7.465.00
7,852.52
15,318.52
1000°
D.C., WASHIMIT ON
7,605.19
1:00.
3,762.38
11.358.57
2550.
250.
2850.
FLORIDA
6,600.00
10,353.25
16,953.25
1000.
1725.
2725.
GFORGIA
6,200,00
6,139.53
12.389.53
800.
1700.
IDAHO
2500,
1,050.00
3,440.97
4,490.97
2000.
2000.
4000.
ILLINOIS
22,016.67
16,570.82
35.557.49
2500.
2500.
THOTANA
14,433.31
5000.
6,225.67
20,759.00
1000.
1000.
2000.
2.425.80
7,004.31
9,430.11
750,
2000.
2750.
FANSAS
3,500.00
6,364.24
9.854.26
1000.
1500.
2500.
KENTUCKY
1270.00
13,725.88
14.915.58
1800.
2800.
LOUISIANA
$2,000,00
4680.
4,980.12
6.980.12
1000.
icoo.
MARILAND
14,935.00
15,705.04
30.639.06
2800.
1000.
3800.
MAINS
2,827178
3,549.73
6.372.51
1000.
1000.
MASSACHUSETTS
2000.
7,015.98
16,152.25
23.168.24
1890.
3200.
PIĆ GAN
5080.
2,100.00
18,509.10
20,609.10
2000.
2000.
MINN SCIA
25.875.00
25,318.20
51,193.20
3700.
1600.
MIE
SSIPPI
5300.
1,000.00
7,052.36
8,052.36
500.
2300.
2800.
MISSOURI -
8,000.00
35,000.00
43.000.00
3300.
(700.
10000,
MONTANA
3,828,00
6.662.59
10,490,59
300
-500.
NENTIONA
-10000
19-208-22
1572-8.20
1200.
1800
NEVADA
2,664.93
3000.
4,810.59
7,475.52
2300.
1300.
3600.
NEW ENGLAND
-
-6,419.57---
3,374.12
9.793.69-
NEW HAMPSHIRE
$83.30
2,749.94.
3,633.24
507,
1000.
1500.
KYN JERSEY
6,197.97
$11,819.74
18,019.71
2000.
2500.
NEW MEXICO
NEW YORK STATE
4500.
3,250.00
3,290.44
4,540.4A
5,372.17
26,719.99
34.092.16
:
5000.
7500.
12, 50.
NEW YORK CITY
38, 00.00
129.565.08
167,958.08
75000
10,000.
17,500.
"
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_379.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
December 29, 1952
CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM, INC.
ANALYSIS OF CASH RECEIPTS AND CASH DISBURSEMENTS
RECEIPTS
Prom 4/1/52 to 12/31/52
1848
Foundation
1951 Field Refunde
And Adrance
Miso.
Total
Total Paid
By Nontha
Balance of cash on hand 4/2/52 -87.371.55
DISBURSEMENTS
2/27/32 to
1752
from 4/1/52 to 12/20/52
1951 Field Easy
Expennar
Faker
Special
Budgal_
Advan
(Included in total)
8,000.00 Pay Roll: /c
95,371.55
Aoril
Key
177,816.00
1,179.80
506.52
1,046.32
2,226.12 24,921.49
2,069.76
2,794.33
437.00
583.05 178,905.57 24,893.84
1,400.29
93.36
June
27.28
July
August
133,362.00
68.79
133,350.00
858.52
830.04.
906.84
2,560.05
746.52
885.30 29,978.70
4,694.99
146.03
830.04 56,797.41
136,337.63 39,094.47
3,337.51
16,143.11
105.59
4,405.89
135,910.05 31.314.32
746.5256.632.89
814.89
814.89 86,130,18
18.70
280.90
739964
739.54 121 676.08
Nexamber
December
Toml
444.528,00 2,283.22
20085.87
550,767.87 473.632.38
230777.96
22.583.72 437.00
137.00
$24,020.72 Munich sub
Total
24.653.93
CASH on hand 4/1/52
95,371.55
CASH Received 4/1 - 12/31/52
455,396.26
SECRET
Total
SECURITY INFORMATION
550.767.5.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_38.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
DDAP 1387
24 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organisations Division
SUBJECT
1
Dr. J. H. Retinger
1. Please noto and return to Mr. Dulles the attached letter
from Dr. J. H. Retinger who has asked Mr. Dulles for an appoint-
ment during his visit in Washington between November 25 and 28.
You will also note that Mr. Dulles does not propose to answer the
letter nor (presumably) to grant the appointment. I am not sure
whether you are familiar with the background on Retinger including
our past difficulties with him. If you are not, I think it is
important for you to have a look at the files which include
numerous items of derogatory information concerning Retinger and
his declared hostility. toward the National Committee for Free
Europe. We went to the mat with our British friends in what I
believo proved to be a successful effort to have Retinger renovad
from the key position which he held on the so-called McMillan
Committee. (You are aware of the fact that the british Service
is now working with the McMillan Committes and in support of it.)
2. Retinger's position ns Secretary General of the European
Movement - as evidenced by the letterhead --
to you.
is probably known
Because of our interest in this motivity, it is important
for you and the appropriate members of your staff to to fully on
notice of Retinger's connection and past performance.
be very enthusiastic about or too hopeful for the production of
I could not
genuinely constructive results in keeping with policies of the
United States Government -- of any organization of which Retinger
would be the Secretary General. To the extent that his loyalties
can be determined, it is clear that they do not run toward the
United States.
Attachment (1)
1
Letter to DDCI from Dr. Retinger
dated 15 November 1952.
(Signed) FRANK 0. WISHER
FRANK G. WISHER
Deputy Director (Plans)
C/PP
SECRET
Secuity Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_381.jpeg ---
SPOIST
Security Information
1951
STATE
FEES &
SALARY ES
FEES &
EXPENSES
TOTAL
Page 2 Cont'd.
1952
SALARIES
EXPENSES
TOTAL
NORTH CAROLINA
2 4,255.00
9,250.57 8 13,505.67
$ 800
NORTH DAKOTA
$ 1.550
780.38
2,881.17
OHIO
11.000.00
13.057.86
3,661.55
25.457.86
$ 2,350
2,000
2,000
OKLAHOMA
2,400
2,100
3,250.00
4,200
3,928.49
7,178.49
OREGON
2,000
2,000
2,200.00
8,000.00
4,000
10 .500.00
FENNSYLVANIA, EAST )-
2,000
8,375.00
40,601.49
2,500
48,976.49
4,500
6,000
WEST)
8,000
14,000
TH CAROLINA
4,000
4,229.17
4,000
6,368.21
8,000
10,597.38
SITH DAKOTA
2,000
1860.00
1,400
1,123.67
3,400
1,933.67
1,000
_ MESSEE
1,000
700.00
15,808.09
2,000
16,508.09
3,600
TEXAS
4,250
14,200.00
16,470.76
7,850
32,670.76
10,000
REOLE ISLAND
2,206.54
26,750
36,750
7.330.52
9,537.05
500
UTAH
2,500
525,00
5,499.59
3,000
6,024.59
VERMONT
1750.00
1,652.74
2,432.74
500
VIRGINIA
250
3.633.7!
750
4,285.41
7,819.15
750
WASHINGTON
1,500
4,312.51
2,250
5,076.26
10,188.77
WEST VIRGINIA
2,000
2,000
2,000.00
4,000
2,455.73
4,455.73
1,000.
WISCONSIN
500
5,000.00
1,500
7,322.53
12,322.53.
HIGHING
1,200
3,800
1,773.84
5,000
2,729.70
4,503.54
WASHINGTON, D. C.
(Federal Employees)
816.51'
5,627.12
6,443.63
1,500
1,500
( INICH
10,555.52
( BENWOOD STAN
6,796,73
1,898.89 12,454.41
7,062.48 13,859.21
TOTALS
$339,077.26
$648,478.69 3986,555.95
$59,605
$147,980
$247,585
i
secret
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_383.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
(
SEGRET
2. As an employee of the national esganisation he is directly
Responsible to the national organization, and to by the fact
under its control, and subject to its supervision witún a
general framework of action.
3. Working the year-round with state chairmen and state committens, /
the national representatie is in an axoallant position at campaign
time to sewure the type of temporary personnal and halp that the
ahaimmum and the state situation require.
:
UBUTUS
Basurity Information
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_384.jpeg ---
14-00000
5*4*
SECURITY INFORMATION
..3=
TABLE OF PERSONNEL
CRUSADE FOR PROM
Executive Vice Chainan
Secratary
Campaign Director
Secretary
"
Abistant to Campaign Director
Clerk Stimographer
National Representatives
.Am
Bo
C.
-X
Headquarters in New York
Labor, Veterans, Federal Employees
New York City operation and special assignments
Management Groups, Corporate Appeals and special assignmenta
two stonographsra
National Representatives in Field
Five National representatives will be assigned on a regional basis to
work with state chairmen and state committees.
Assistant Treasurer's Offico
rer's off
Assistant Treasurer
Secretary
Chief Accountant
Assistant Accountant
Stenographer
Accounting Department
Telephone Operator
Stock Clerk and Meesenger
Publicity and Public Relations Director
Secretary
Assistant Director
_ Stenographer.
√"
Director
Features, Magazines, House Organs
-->
Speakers Bureau
Radio and W Director
"I'
Secretary
Mrector Women's and School Groups
Mr
National Representatives for assignment on a Regional Rasis
* New England andle Atlantic (Out of New York Office
South
Midwest"
* Far East
agi
*1. 34
Munich Operation
G
Public Relations
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
-
1 man)
\:)
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_385.jpeg ---
-9
AT;
14-00000
)
BEARITY: INFORMATION
CRISADE FOR FREEDOM
1953-Budget
January
February
$55,000
55,000
March
45,000'
1st Quarter
$245,000
1
•April
45,060
MAR
45,000
Juna
50,000
11-2nd Quarter
140,000
Julys
60;000
✓ (*Printing $20,000)
August..
30,000
Eeptember
110,000
3 3rd Quarter
260,000
Octobor
100,000
November
50,000
December:
45,000
lith Quarter
205,000
$750,000
$150,000
July printing
_ 60,000
80,000
TOTAL 1953
$830,000
$830,000
It is requested that the budget be made available.cn a quarterly
Easib with a pasient on danuary 1 of 145,000 to cover the first
quarter) another payment on April 1 of $140,000 to cover the
secated quarter} aid payment on July 1 of £260,000 and the,
fourth on October 1 of 8205.000.
addition to this, 19-requested that in order to keep all printing
well in advance of the compan: 280,000 balable on or about
carpalent:
July 1.
:
SOCIA
LIMIZDATLON

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_387.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
Jamiary 20, 1953
:
.
orig returned
to tonic
Dear Relsun'i
The following is submitted for consideration but without
recomendation so far as theFund's board is concerned, since
a question of basis policy is involved which own bo dotorsined
only by the Corporation.
The Fund now occupies an entire building, except for the
ground floor which contains two small stores and a moving picture
theatre, under a sub-lease from the operator of the moving picture.
theatre. The Fund's cúb÷loase expires, November 21, 1956 but the
Fund has the option to carcel on liovember 21, 17th on payment of an
indmunity of 161,8.0. During the reconstruction of the building to
fit it for Fund occupancy the Fund contributed roughly $160,000, to the
cost of asphalt tile flours, acoustic tile collings on certain flrs,
Fluorescent lighting fixtures, portitioning and air constitioning. The
Fund's offices take up about 32,760 square feet so that disregarding
leasehold improvemente rent paid by the Fund of $123,760 por una
average $3.777 per square foot. The Fund has no right of meal at the
na
expiration of the five-year terme
The ormer of the foe has recently placed the building on the murkot.
aking price is $1,250,000 compared with the assessed valuation of
$1,150,000. The Fund's landlord is seeking a reduction in is 205900-
ment and are are informed has been granted a reduction in Port by the owner
of the fee, justification therefor being the 1. areased tax burden (the
Fund's landlord's lease being a net lease) and the less than enticipated
income from his moving picture theatre. The owner of the fos tas
rejected as offer of $900,000 in cash for the building.
in the opinion of the Fund's counsel the Fund, if it owned the
: building, would be except from New York City real estate taxes in respect
of all the space ocupied by the Fund, nately, the sound, third, fourta,
fifth, airth and seventh flours. Añ'appropriate uzgunt of ve total
valuation attributable to the two sturus and moving picture toestro
on the ground flour would be subject to taxation. 1952 real estate
taxes amounted to $38,900.
4.
The Fund's current rent of #3.777 per square foot is very low for
air conditioned property in the decirable location wire the Fund's
offices n.w are. Should the present owner or an investment ur
speculative purchasor refuse to renee the runi's lease in bovember 1950,
without a substantial increase in ront; the Fund would, if it are still
in operation on the present scale and if the work real estate market
is not depressed, be faced with either a reatly increased rent cost or
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_382.jpeg ---
14-00000
17
SK. 1242 ONTRATION
BAN CRUSADE MUTOH FOR ASKS
TAB
B
4
23, 3951, Gert wrote to
state chulam How the 18 trade vequently to opinion and surgation
on the last of centiming the Grant the pea
vandaag ding & your mantingan abated by a
fund drive in the fall. Neprim play this contims this.
'
Thin would require the development of a fled ortion og sph scalo
to bring on tay spend and to set by t
one Sink Tradeship was a the 1952 only.
ob
may be attained in two w
"
The way is to cure at tontil the and epoped
mout the answe
tion of national gaps in an of activity, with the ws of
mering volunteer Reibwship on the stato med Recall ov
the way is to work directly in the state from the city and county level.
Wo ove jerantly staffed by out the acted neocesory in t
the
approach on national level. Novator the comt nahed aqua PO
Brat after. For ongealentional purpose the cou
- fone regions with national attivo i
Ingimas Thin watsamal rug'ative should et
netber of the unik gabed to be of
maticnuk plaš¢ fals
2.
be
za of each
all to priod eo a
sanded to the sites wishin
Hin functions govarally tryi
To interparet itional policy to the ašata duinena,
"
To fscilitats the glue of matached, as valencns,
na P
the national office to the unwithin the vainas
To assist the state che cucing hom the natio
office no
of a can
from
..
To aid the aate hai porng his organisation.
As the two of the caps the
:
to the fron would, the cou
of the national representative, secure the sofia ee
ngonafe at the abute or to carry on the intensive phase of the enpaign
mitor, within budgetary
feid
nation
periance in the Mid in voluntary expendeations over the yardisatio
chia stil of regional representation is effective anal fur
the following rouzong.
1. The national representative is the full-time xxployes of the
organisation, with a kolo of the broad pisses of the act
of the organization. He is therefore squipped to in
la intery
policy and exercise judgment au repidly as required.
i
SECRET
Security information
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_388.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECUNIA INFORMATION
the expense of moving to other less desirable quarters where the rent
would probably also greatly exceed the present $3.777. Our difficulties in
1951 in this connection demonstrate the possible magnitude of that problem.
i
If it be true that the building, if owned by the Fund, would be exempt
from real estate taxes (except for the commercially leased property which
certainly could be leased for more than the tax cost) the operation of the
building would cost the Fund considerably less than the present annual
rental of $123,760. In the absence of a more careful study than it is
possible to make without disclosing our possible interest in such a
purchase the amount of that saving can be little better than guesswork.
My guess is it should be between $50,000. and $75,000, allowing interest
on the capital investment at a two per cent rate.
The question is whether the Fund should or should not attempt to
purchase the building either to safeguard the right of continued cocupancy
or to affect the estimated saving in annual expense, or both.
If the
ansmar is in the affirmative, wo shall see what can be done toward
negotiating a satisfactory price and estimating in detail the probable
annual saving and advise you further before any commitment is made so
that you can approve or disapprove the entire deal. If there is a
reasonable chance that you would approve, I suggest you take immediate
steps to our mark the necessary funds so that in a satisfactory price
can be agreed upon the transaction can be promptly concluded.
Sincerely yours,
/e/ William
William L. Digby
:
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_389.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
ispend.
O c A LE
SECRET
Security Information
102812
15 January 1953
MEMBRANDUM FOR: Chief, Eastern European Division
SUBJECT
1.
Arthur Maixner; young Czech political refugee
recommended by Mr. Ortona of the Italian Embassy.
BO/P 1987
Attached hereto is a letter from Egidio Ortona of the Italian
Embassy, who is recommending for our consideration the above-named
individual who is said to be the son of Dr. Arthur Maixner, formerly
Also
the Minister Plenipotentiary of Czechoslovakia to the Vatican.
attached is a brief curriculum vitas of Maixner.
In
2. It is rather unusual for a foreign diplomat, even though he
be on good terms with officials of this Agency, to recommend personnel
to us for our use, and under the circumstances I do not suppose that
there would be any way in which you could make secure use of this
young man even if you were to find him in other respects suitable.
other words, he is "blown" by the very fact of his having been recom-
mended to us by a foreign diplomat. And I am also aware of the fact
that this would be a good cheap way of effecting penetrations of the
Agency were we to follow the practice of acting favorably on recom-
mendations of this character. Nevertheless, there may be some aspect
of this matter which would have significance to you or to Mr. Tiam
which I do not readily perceive, and accordingly I am passing this
on to you and to Mr. Timm with this thought in mind. For example,
there is a bare possibility that because of the contacts and connec-
tions of Maixner and his father, a former Czech diplomat, it might be
possible to make use of him (on an arm's-length basis) in a program
of defector solicitation.
3.
I am also furnishing a copy of this memorandum to Mr. Braden
in view of the possibility that Maixner might be of some use to Radio
Free Europe, assuming that the objection of his having been introduced
to this Agency by Ortona could be overcome.
4. In any case, I should appreciate your suggesting a suitable
reply to Mr. Ortona, bearing in mind the fact that he has been helpful
to us in the past and does seem to be well disposed.
Claim
Enclosures (2)
As specified.
of
* OG.
T
Hairy Reis
FRANK G. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
•WPD seeing
Security on
this man.
act C/IO
C/FI
C/WE
SECRET
Becurity Namies

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_39.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Dr 1371.
Seminity Information
21 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
Leland Stowe; I&S Approval of NCFE Request.
SUBJECT
1. This memorandum will record the understanding arrived at
in a conversation today with Colonel Edwards, Chief of 145, and
reported orally to Mr. Durkee by me. Admiral Miller telephoned
me today with an urgent request that we give our authorization and
approval to the use of Mr. Stowe for a further period of six months
in the capacity of a consultant to FE and not as a regular employee.
This was the same basis was finally approved for the first period
of six months which is about to expire.
MOST
2. In discussing this matter with Colonel Edwards I refreshed
his recollection as to certain features of the original arrangement,
including the fact that Stowe is an extremely capable individual
who has attracted other good people, notably Russell Hill, into the
effort, and who has no serious security rape against him. (He is
not regarded as a loyalty or security risk but rather as a source
of possible embarrassment in view of certain earlier writings of his.)
Admiral Miller informed me and I passed on to Colonel Edwards the
fact that there have been no questions or flurries of any kind
concerning Stowe and the further fact that he has been doing a very
effective job. Colonel Edwards approved from a security standpoint
the continuation of. Mr. Stowe as a consultant to RFE for a further
period of six months.
3. I requested Mr. Durkee to so advise Admiral Miller at the
earliest possible moment. I assume he has done so.
CC: C/PP
1
782
FRANK G. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_386.jpeg ---
14-00000
".
Alabama
Arizona
Arkansas
California
-
North
-
South
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Washington, D.C.
Florida
Georgia
Idaho
Indiana
Illinois
->
Iowa
Kansas
Missouri
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
-
Chicago Area
Down State
Maryland
Massachusetts.
Michigan
Hinnesota
Mississippi
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
North Carėlina
North Dakota:
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
:
"
1951 CONTRIBUTIONS
12,580.60
5,399.38
22,161.12
58.699.21
75,872.71
51;128.01
30,890.1:3
2,464.06
43;401.61
28,996.88
44,871.21
11,110.04
46,000.13
57;61:9.01
29,445.26
25,716.82
27,837.48
100;171.49
:
27,532.48
12,670.40
2,992.16
23,960.69
49.916.45
103,698.17
67,494.14
10;548.27
15,289.51
8,701.06
6,008.32
9,172.44
57,189.56
21,042.03.
38,563.78
:
8,739.73-
65,343.44
37,293.71
29,637.08
Fennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennesse
Texas
Utah
Vermont
* 135,052.40
14,867.15
24,738.02
1,564.89
44,118.99
75,729.70
15,227.07
5,105.89
31,21:3.18
17,347.66
8,375.58
:
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
New York State
New York City (Metropolitan)
Alaska
Canada
Mexico
Ancrymous
Misc.
Munich (Contributions in European currency)
N.C.F.E. (Contributions received by N.C.F.E.
and credited to Crusade)
23,996.11
7,233.49
158,895.98
139,438.14
80.00
15.77
14.00
262.65
11,938.05
1,999,114.78
5,173.07
6,912.09
TOTAL
$ 2,011,229.94
3

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_390.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (chock mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
'
FROM:
".
CPP
TO
ROOM
NO
DATE
RLC'D
FWO'D
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
NO.
DATE
COMMENTS
C/IO
Bill - die Jo show him
-ttit's
Return to C/10 file
0.
7.
8.
9.
10.
12.
13.
14.
15.
attachment/ to rupade
TWB glove this to Henry Ford of (?)
Tom - I would
definitely gut
this tope to Archie.
hai
19
No, it's imman's writte
Not the time. I however
explained verbally, th
rade showed him
Prples of Celeration o
Bill Let's us it
to win . It's
-
a good or cuse for gettin
novel with him
again
to do
a catter?
williele I want
you
this please und whicco &
nettion
FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1953
SECRET
16-61156-1
3. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_391.jpeg ---
"
'
-
14-00000
SEGNET
SECURITY INFORMATION
15 January 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR: INSPECTOR GENERAL
SUBJECT:
Briefing Papers on NCFE and CFA
1.
Before I send this memorandum to Messrs. Brophy, Ford
et al., I want you to have a look at it for reasons we discussed
on the telephone today. Please give me a quick reaction.
2. I am also enclosing a memorandum on CFA which is about
what they would want to know.
3. These are the only copies I have left of these two
memoranda and I must have them back..
2 Attachments
TS 85308
TS 85340
JWB
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
147
COND SEUDET
top sacket in
Secast
35960
_ COPY OF 3 CODIES
✓
=
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_392.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
SECRET
Security Information
:
NCFE has, from small beginnings, for purposes only generally defined,
grown into a large institution organized as followst
NOFE is a non-profit membership corporation, organised under
the laws of New York State. Intimately associated with it are threo
separate corporationss the Crusade for Freedom (the fund raising
and cover mechanism), the Free Europe University in Exile, and the
Fortuguese radio relay installation, Rarut.
The Committoe's major divisions, functions and budget for 1953 are au
follows:
8.
-
Division of General Administration Budget for fiscal your
1953. – $779,100
This is a headquarters administrative unit in NCFE's New
York headquarters. It is not an over-all administrative unit,
as each subdivision has its own administrative organication.
b. Division of Care Relations Indret for fiscal year 1953
$1,004,292
The Division of igre Relations is the political centor of
NOTE. Through thia Division, support is given to the various
emigre organizations and to individual emigres.
--
--
In the past two years, this Division has attempted with
conspicuous lack of success to create unified refugee groups.
It is at present in the process of reviewing and revising its
rulations with individual ongres and igre organizations. It
is attempting to exercise closer Nancial control over those
organisations and to develop a program using enige groups and.
individuals in a way which will contribute mora positively to
psychological warfare afforts. This Division of CT is tho
most responsive to guidance.
Division of Intellectual Cooperation
Year 1953 – 15 0ES ALL
-
-
Budget for Fiscal
The activities of this Division are principally directed to
the building of intellectual resources which will ensure continuity
with the past and which can be used when the natollito countries
are liberated. The Division's activities consist of:
1. The Fast Ehropean inquiry, an outgrowth and enlargement
of the Yanubian inquiry, Mich was created be Woodrow Wilson
in 1918. Its aim is to prepare basic materials in order to
meet the minimum needs of those who will be charged with the
morganization of the ranubian area.
2. Other Studies of a miscellaneous nature useful to the other
divisions of PE and to students of Central Europe.
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_395.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
SECRET
Security Infecciation
04-
II
The foregoing is a cursory outline of NCPE and a brief record of our
attents to solve administrative probleme. To complete the picturi, the follow
e
ing is brief outline of the major psychological problems face with NCPK.
in
la not wht it 14 -- an interral and balanced part of the total
The top
13 .. program for dohling with the extellite nations of Eastern Europe.
of Metals of HOPE have no detailed comprehension of .. policy, nor any under-
string of how they can contriinte to its development and operation. They give
only price to to ides of chtaining policy podarice from Washington. Their
1
apparent attitude has been that they can make a trip to hington, determine
This push-
what high policy" is, and return to New York with the job done.
batten mentality, added to their deep-seated suspicion of Government inter-
formes, haz lend them to resist our efforts to study Weir rele and to develop
new foas, or reassens old oren.
tim
is a remilt of these attitudes, there has been considerable difficulty
in information about HOP detivities, problems and plans. For examplo,
we do not receive any remilor comunication fra Admiral.". Willers we have
received to list of NCPR porsommel, nor any miniton of meetings of the Staff
Preative Committer, or the foard of Nirectors. Even more important than this
in 'e fact that the heads of divisions are prevented from having contact with
except on ocensions wen Admiral iller is out of town. As a result, for
118,
instance, Mr. Lang, the head of ; who has considerable problems and is
anime for the fullest liaison, is prevented from dealing with un personally.
in
Conversely, every attempt to deal with NOFE personnel indivisually is looked
upon with aspicion and carried on by WITY personnel with soke appretension.
The reasons for Admiral Hiller's attitude are two-foldt (a) In his organization
te vante mithing done through hin; and (b) He does not wish any outside
cover his activities. (Adiral Filler's "anner of conducting affairs
vitt's Committee is resented by Mr.ncer Phenix and other members of
the board of Directorn, but r. Tarix and NOME Directors support Admiral
Hiller in his reluctance to deal outside the Roard.
14.
This lack of consultation and common study has clear reflections in the
organizations itself, HOSE is not an interrated organization. Each division
operates separately, without any real relation to other divisions. Added to
this, the lack of a clear understanding of the Committee's purposes and of its
place in the total psychological warfare efforts of the United States has led
to real dissatisfaction among the Division heads. They are anxious to know
what they are doing, to integrate their own efforts and to cooperate to the
MATIZIA.
:
To formulate our own and CP ideas, we have been and are carrying on
discussions with the officials and working personnel of MCFE. In some of
these discussions, Hr. Francis B. Stevens of the State Department, has been a
direct participant.
Security Infurnici

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_397.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
SECRET
Ly information
6
Should RFE be forced out of Germany
--
its facilities in
Portugal can be expanded to take over the job. Programming can
be moved to Londen and Paris. In addition, HFE har asked us
to consider the feasibility of their locating a station in
Turkey to enable them to program full time with a strong signal
into Dumania, Bulgaria and Albania.
(2) Crusade for Freden. The Crusade for Freedry, the fund
raising cover sechs of MCFE and CPA, is pretty much out of
hand. It is operated at a separate corporation and the responsible
officials of , except Admiral Hiller, have literally washed
their bands of any attempt to control or direct its activities. As
a result, it has become a high pressure, fund-raising outfit which
has little comprehension of the reasons for its existence or
knowledge of the kind of miblicity which should be undertaken.
Among the working personnel of NCFH, it is looked upon with great
skepticism and much appresionion. The single strength of the
Crusade for Freedon is the fact that it does raise money from
individual Americans, not much money, but still sone 23,000,000
Americans have contributed. This fuct is a powerful weapon.
For example, Adenamer's party, the Rundestag, in defending RPE
from attacks by the STD, cites as one of its main arguments the
support and concern of 23,000,000 Americans that this activity be
contimned.
Immediate attention is being given to having the Crusado
conducted next year by the Heritage Foundation. Mr. C. N. Vandeburg
of that organization has stated he would take on the job.
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_396.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
Thoso discussions have covered a wide variety of subjects which can
conorally be described co follamt
(1) What in Es place an a whole in rican polley toward
the matollito nations? What is A orloan polles?
Wat is Aorloan polles? What modifications
are likely?
(2) How onn FFP, osrecially the fivial of igre Relations,
contributo nora effectively, to psychological and political warfaro,
mt œily for affecto benirsi the Iron Curtain, but in the Free World?
For example - How can Rh sourly engage in further activities in
the pattern of its successful cations at to datione lave
Lator Hearingt and the international Red Croes Meetings at Toronto?
(3) Should NOTE our times to mupport enter concile, or should
sale other technique to developed which can crable 16 to be one
offective use of agres for psychological warfare purposes?
4.9
(4) How can the research and lublientiane vivision, ve fivision
of Intellectual Cooperation, qvề tho Frau niwasity best contribute
to those offerta?
(5)
•
In officiently organized? What, for example, is tho
effect of the Division of igre Hointions' dealings with migres on
the position of RP in Europe, etc?.
? Mat kind of
that stidies and scans of
You can Anerican and
information
(6) low can yo give scifio guidance to
information is wanted, for ample, by: #FF7
overeating jandus; can to made available to ?
British logations in the sliten test provide guidance
for ML?
III
There are, in addition, size specific current par les that should to
montioned. They aret.
(1)
in resttion
Europe in Germany 16 Ye
The position of Tree
Easily diff. The political
situation in Germany ling developed so that the eman expolicos,
mubering some 9,000, ter, voined with the extreme nationalist
elements, mae of who are an "extrefate, scas plovad
Separatists. This groups holds à potential possible belance of pover
between the CD and the Sparesult, both parties, it particularly
the SFD, are looming more vociferously nationalistic
an
American operation in Germany, including the Voice of America, will be
the subject of pressure, is most valmorable of all because of its
Fantern European personel and the nature of ite broadcast, s'a
problems are the subject of careful study at the present time by NOPE,
and others.
SECRE
Securing
ɑs

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_393.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
amation
..
-
SMILE
OZIAZMAN INTE
*Bakthaeng}PIĘ PO CANDANG 1.1334 PRANGA KAZENSKITE GATES
3. Scholarships to American universities this year will be
Ɛ0-25″ to highly qualified exiles who have signed a pledge
to return to their homelands after liberation.
4. Textbooks to replace Communist textbooks are being pro-
pared in stockpile and manuscript form.
5. The Mid-European Law Project, which digoats and annotates
current legislation from the Iron Curtain countries.
6. The East European Accessiona list, which publishes a
monthly annotated bibliography of current published mintorial
from the satellites received in the Library of Congross.
Free Europe University in Exile
4037931
-
Budget for fiscal year 1953
Two hundred exile students, all escapecs, are provided with
board and lodging at the University in Strasbourg. Each student
attends the University of Strasbourg for his or her formal education.
The Free University, in addition to providing board, lodging, and
tuition, conducts courses and seminars dealing with the countries
of origin of these exile escapees. The University operates on the
theory that these young people are being equipped for futuro londer-
ship after literation.
c. Research and Publication Service
1993 - 197,545
-
Budget for fiscal year
The Committee for Research and Publications was created in
November 1951 to make available in currently useful for information
about the satellite countries. It gathers Information fron four
basic sourcesi
1. The analysis of 270 Communist newspapers and periodicals;
2. RFE's overseas information-gathering network;
-1
3. Monitoring reports fran all major satellite radio stations.
The analysis of the 10,000 publications from the satellite
area ruceived annually by the Library of Congress. Te com-
piled information is used in the fellowing ways:
a) Within NCFE
->>>
Daily digest of all Iron Curtain information.
These are prepared for the use of RFE's
New York language desk;
b) Weekly trend meetings by AFE RPS deak heads to discusa
the interpretation and use in radio programming of events
in the Iron Curtain countries;
SECTET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_394.jpeg ---
14-00000
г.
SECRET
Security Information
.3.
f.
c) Research projects on specific terrets for 's New
York and Munich lantiago desks. Daily monitoring
highlights summarize major events in all satellite
countries;
d). RPC also makes available its information files to the
Divisions of Intellectual Cooperation and inders Re-
_lations;
c) A "Black Tock" prepared every six months, contains
comunist attacks against NOTE-RPE,
a
f) To the reneral public - "News from Behind the Iron Cur-
tain, a monthly magazine of source material about the
target area, is issued to 1,000 people in the field
of communications. 142 research studies have been dis-
tributed outside the Committee to s total of 32,500.
people. Foreign langer billetins in each of the major
tongues of the satellite counter, are distributed to
some 5,000 exiles in 52 counties outside the Soviet
orbit. These bulletins, which average 100 pages each,
are the only complete and unbiased source of information
about their captive hatelands available to these who
have escaped.
Radio Free Europe - fudget for fiscal year 1953 - 19,384,555 NY,
46,909,971 Germany, $1,202,755 Fa
Radio Free Europe's main broadcasting studio and expigment is
lecated in Munich, Germany ● Broadcast facilities are maintained
also in New York and there is a relay station in Portugal. RFE
broadcasts an average of about 1,006 hours per week. this
broadcasting time 1874 hours are original programing, rected
mainly to Czechoslovakia, Thingary and Feland. Broadcasts to Jul-
garia, Rumania, and Albania are prepared and relayed from New York.
New York exercises policy control over 171 broadcasts through
daily guidances and a tele-type system between Munich and New York.
Radio Free Europe has its om information section to pro-
vide its broadcast materials. It has correspondents and offices
in London, Paris, Stockholm, Berlin, Hanture, Frankfurt, Salsburg,
Vienna, Linz (Austria), Wels (Austria), Fraz (Austria), Home,
Trieste, Athens and Istanbul. These offices produce an averago
of over one thousand reports per north. In addition, material
for broadcasting comes from 1) satellite press publications;
2) PE's monitoring service of ostellite and Russian broadcasts;
3) information from the Division of Kaigre Relations, private
letters, news service, the BC, VCA and others.
Security

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_398.jpeg ---
14-00000
CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM
1950 CAMPAIGN
:
1. The Crusade was launched by General Dwight D. Eisenhower on a
nation wide broadcast.
2. The symbol of the Crusade, a ton ton World Freedom Bell, inscribed
with a quotation from Lincoln, "This World under God shall have a new birth
of freedom", toured the United States from coast to coast. The "Froedon*
Bell" was sent to Berlin to become part of a "Freedom Shrine", and tolled
there over an international radio hookup.
.3. Freedom Scrolls signed by 15,000,000 contributors were taken to
Berlin to become a permanent part of the Froodom Shrine.
:
4. In the United States, local committees were established throughout
the country. General Lucius Clay was appointed chairman of the Fund raising-
campaign of the Crusade for Freedom. Mr. Abbott Mashburn, Chief, Publio
Relations for General Foods Corp. was appointed as the director. Assisting
companies were: Fund raising John Price Co., Inc. Advertising - Hewitt,
Ogilvy; Benson & Mather Inc. Small mass contributions were solicited.
Contributions from large individual donors were solicited later, in order
to afford the fund raising campaign a broader continuity.
Literature (samples
attached) of all kinds, explaining Radio Free Europe were distributed.
-
5. Financial results were as follows I
-
Expenses;
$917,000.00
Contributions; $1,317,000.00
1951 CAMPAIGN
The 1951 Crusade Campaign was begun by the launching of balloons into
Czechoslovakia and Poland containing pamphlets of encouragement to the people
of these countries. Copies of the message and samples of the balloons were
used to solicit contributions in the United States. Publicity dealt largely
with Radio Free Europe. Free magazine advertising was widely used for the
first time. A coast to coast telethon was used.
Inadvertently, through mistakes of the staff and the failure to adequately
brief community leaders, the Crusade mistakenly implied that the Voice of
America was ineffective that only Radio Free Europe, the privately supported
radio broadcasting station, could do an effective job.
-

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_400.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
1.
3 -
;
B
purposes on a mase scalo - a freedomgram to be signed by contributors
has been distributed. These freedomgrams, translated into six languages
will be broadcast over Radio Free Europe.
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_401.jpeg ---
14-00000
a
:
5
I
SECRET
Secure Ormation
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
".
13 January 1953
:
DEPUTY CHIEF, POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STAFF
Request by the Directors of NCFE for a statement from
the responsible officer in CIA that NCFE has no respon-
sibility of any kind for the initiation of, nor for the
payments in respect to radio equipment known as the
MB-50.
1. The enclosed letter, is as you suggested, drafted for the
signature of Mr. Tracy Parnes, which when signed, should be transmitted
to this Office for New York's attention.
2. Two versions have been prepared. Both should be signed, the
sterilized version will be sent to New York, the unsterilized original
will be retained in our files.
10
Attachments:
As stated above
Thomas W. Bunden
THOMAS W. FRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SEOPET
Sap
Secur
ation

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_399.jpeg ---
14-00000
After conferences with the State Department, it was agrood that VOA
and RFE wore complimentary activities and that in the future the Crusades
(1) Would not put out anything which might be interpreted
as a criticism of the Voice. To that end, an attached leaflet
was inserted as an insert in the January 1952 "Crusader", a
newsletter mich was sent out to the 8,000 regional chairman
of the Crusade for Freedom. It was intended to acquaint the
regional Crusade organisations with the facts about the Voice.
of America and to offset any criticism or unfortunate comparison
between Radio Free Europe and the Voice of America.
Financial results were as followB!
Expenses;
$1,932,478
Contributions; $2,011,229.94
1952 CAMPAION
The 1952 Crusade Campaign was begun by General Eisenhower, Adlai
Stevenson and Henry Ford, II, the 1952 Campaign Chairman. The Campaign
was endorsed in a letter from President Truman:
#I understand that on the success of the 1952 Crusade rests
the plans of the Crusade for Freedom to build more radio stations
in Free Europe and Asia. If this can be done, and I believe that it
will be done, the Free world can nore offectively get the truth
behind the Iron Curtain.
"It is essential that the people everywhere know that we are
working for peace, freedom and prosperity for all mankind."
The assistance of the Advertising Council was enlisted and for the
first time outdoor billboard advertising was used. Records were made con-
taining 2 fifteen minute programs on "The RFE story" and spot films were
arranged for television with narration by Herrry Fonda.
For the first time, fund raising letters seeking large contributions
were sent to all leading corporations.
-
The Campaign was highly organised on the local level with state chairmen
in almost every state. The Post Office Department permitted the use of a local
post office address for receipts. Endorsements were obtained from many organ-
isations such as the American Legion, VFW, CIO, National Auto. Dealers,
American Brewers Foundation, and Catholic War Veterans etc. For fund raising
:
4+
3
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_40.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
(When Filled in)
DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE
SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT
NC FE
ANALYST
12.
CROSS REFINAŁU 10 THIS FILE
8.
DATE PROCESSED
DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
RI FILE NO.
3. DISPATCH OR SOURCE DOC. SYMBOL NO.
BRITISH
7. SOUNCL CRYPTONYM 8. DATE OF INFO. •.
DATE
Nov. 1952
EVALUATION
10. DISSEMINATED IN
DOCUMENT DISPOSITION
13. TRANSFERRED TO
RI FILE NO.
PERTINENT INFORMATION
THIS PETRSTO A TOD SECRET DOCUMENT
FILED
SECTION BY
Js.
JS 981191
FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.
FORM
867 USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
SECRET
Daft
:
(7-48)

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECURITY INFORMATION
31 December 1953
MEMORALDUM FOR: DEFUTY DIRECTOR (FLINS)
SUBJECT:
VIA: Chief, Folitical and isychological airfare
NCFE Cooperation with CIA
The cooperation of NCFE in certain matters should be brought
to your attention.
1. In aiding the Agency to take advantage of theSlansky
trials, NCFE: (a) has made available complete monitoring of
the trial; (b) is translating into Hungarian, Polish, humanian,
Bulgarian, and albanian, transcripts of the trial; and, (c) is
sending us complete extracts of the Iron Curtain press dealing
with the trial. all of this has been, or is being done with
great speed, NCFE is making a major project out of the
Slansky trials and will distribute a pamphlet on the subject
in the satellite languages to its extensive oversens mailing
lists.
2. NCFE is relasing to the press and carrying on its
broadcast the substance of incoming cable 21600 aated 17 December
from Vienna, on Vienna reace Conference.
3. Inaxdition, CFF has done some specific research for
us with skill and preat speed.
10/TONIC: WFD/hka
Distributions:
Orig. & 1- Addressee
2 cc
1 cc
1 cc
-
-
-
.IO/TONIC
- C/TO
RI
THOMAS 4. BRADEN
Chief
International
L
rganizations Division
SEGNET
SECURITY INFORMATION

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_402.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
:
CONHDENTIA..
Security information
Reactive Reglube
Please spect
12 January 1953
Niis
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director Central Intelligence
FROM
Chief, International Organizations
You may wish to speak to the Director about the fact that
Charles Moore, a very close friend of mine who is Director of
Public Relations for the Ford Motor Company, called me last week
to suggest that his boss, Honry Ford, would like to be asked to
become President of the Heritage Foundation.
I think this lays to rest any fears we may have had of Mr.
Ford's (in roality Mr. Moore's) criticism of the Crusade for
Freedom leading to Mr. Ford's becoming inactive on our behalf.
The Director might wish to call Mr. Ford and ask him to
"become President if it is feasible for Mr. McCloy to become
Chairman of the Board. In discretion, the Director may not
wish to mention to Mr. Ford the message passed to me by Mr.
Moore.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
CONFIDENTIAL
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_404.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
:
7
:
was one amount of 600.00*549,908.st
in
INVENTORIES ASSETS (At Cost):
Acquired:
07
TOTAL
NEW YORK
GERMANY.
PORTUGAL
Prior to Jaly I 1968
Current Piscal
$3,113,305.28
1,034,937.60
3316,511.20
27,209.29
01,561,982.26
$1,234,811.82
261,727.89
675,300.62
$4,148,213.08
8:14,420.47
31,803,710.15
$1,900,112.4h
drakow of revised 1953 budget as it applies to New York, Munich
and offices follows:
Rea Tarkk
Capital
158,000.00
Listen
Marich
768,261.00
3,054,859.977
Total
42.981,120.0
Operating
$2,405,044.00
Total
02,563,044.00
1,232,690.00
2,000,957.00
5,158,420.00
8,013,279.00
$9,596,160.00
$12,577,280.00.
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_407.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
7
SLOUINTY INFORMAVER
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
RFE in Turkey
:
7 January 1953
:
•
ACTION NECESSARY: Will you please decide or cause to be decided the
following question: Should the National Committee for a Free Europ:
in its approach to Turkish authorities exploring the possibility of
creating an RFE station in Turkey contact Turkish authorities as a
non-governmental private Committee or as a CIA-financed institution?
Background
1. The State Department haz asked that RFE not approach Turkish
authorities until VOA's attempt to get into Turkey has been accepted
or refused by the Turks. The Department has now given the Voice of
America until 15 January to conclude its negotiations with the Turkish
Government. These negotiations appear to be leading nowhere and, on
the assumption that VOA will not pain entrance to Turkey, the Depart-
ment has authorized RFE to begin negotiations on the above date.
2. Bob Lang, Bill Durkee and Mr. Wadsworth, former Ambassador
to Turkey, as well as the 15 Division have all beer in on discussions
as to how NCFE should approach the Turks. Mr. Wadsworth counsels
that all cards be laid on the table, and he bases his reasoning on
his belief that the Turks will know about it anyhow and that RFE is.
likely to get further if it comes clean. The NE Division on the
other hand hopes that the approach can be that of a private committee
and that no mention need be made of CIA's interest.
3. Your advice on the above question will not constitute approval
of the building of a Turkish station or of operations from Turkey. By
PRC decision at the last hearing on NCP's budget these questions in
Turkey must be brought back here for approval if the attitude of the
Turks is favorable.
homas Broker
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECOAT
SECURITY INFORMATIONS

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
"
:
NO. 21 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
Chief, Cover Division
Thrui FI Plans
MCFF Employment of Mr. Brutus Coste
1. This is to advise you that, the to delay in our operations,
the NCFE has been requested to provice interin employment. for
Hr. Brutus Conte.
2.
We have been informed that the NCFR/MISC has offered Mr. Coste
a contract for the reparation of a study on integration of the Rujanian
with the Soviet economy. However, in view of bubject's knowledge of the
refugee political situation and interest in propaganda measures, a nosi-
tion utilizing this background would be more advantageous to the BCFE
and this Division than the proposed economic study.
3. It is requested that the proposed employment of Subject be
discussed with the NCF3 and that we be informed of the netlen takun..
This invision is prepared to reimburse the NOFE for Subject!s ualery
if such is desired. It is understood that subject will continue,
during the period of NCFE employment, to perform for this Division
certain assignments which will not interfere with his NCFE work.
4. Your approval of the proposal for such employment is requested.
SE-5/MClewson/kp (19 Nov. 1952)
Distributions
Crig. & 1
-
Addressee
1
-
2
-
1
->
KI
SE-S
IO
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_405.jpeg ---
14-00000
::
;
247
STOUR.
INFORMATION
CRUSADE
Part supported by the Crusade for Freedon, as
And-raising mechaniam. From er h, 1950 to date, the.
hade has been responsible for some will collars in coniri-
to BAR and RFE.
NR
Exes for the Crumade, over the
od,”
All monies red,
same fod," amounted to some 2 /lions.
expe turen, er total of 1 3/4 millions have been synt
efanbly and a lely on 'cations, 1..,
, receivers, suporting pent.
i
22
»
72 in July 1950 conloyed 177, of whom 116 were Americans,
2% of hom were employed in Permary. At necment, RPM hae al
WA of 1770, of whom 252 are Lerican. In York, they
het
In Munkon,
arative headquarters, the staff member 195.
thin the programding headachang, Qhere are 1249 logans.
abon, the tchnical relay quarters, there are now 33%
viduals. These figures include only staff employces on the
ether payroll.
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_403.jpeg ---
1.
!
1
14-00000
SEOUT
SECHNY Y INFORMATION
SU UT OF FACTS ON RADIO PREM
Radio Free Europe (RPE) um established as a scurate diaton
of HCFE when the latter was incorporated on May 11, 10. tea
been on the air since mid-da!]
io. At the close of 1050,
broadcasts were totaling 71 hours daily, programs of 1] hours such
being addressed to the people of Foll, Chechenalia, th
Huanda and Jalgprin.
total cost of this clest poriot,
17 May 19 to 30 June 1950, 37.87, operating and carital
141
couts being roughly even.
to see these are conte
The next gent va
rise in the same ratio capital to operating
$4,950,006.03.
-
-367-0
-
to a total of
sriginal.
Today, RFE Procenata to all the above mentioned countries, with
the addition of Obania, a wookly total rate of 1086 war,
the
tid ch 190 hours are original programing some of the to
Forld broadcast hours directed at the Orbit.
broadensts are directed mainly to Onechoslovakia, Huary and
Huntery
exed f
Browdenate to buljarin, Kumania and Albania an
belķária,
from New York.
260
a
band.
relayed
The estimated exconditures of RFE for the fecal your 100 are
carital 8,991,170, operating expenses, 4,196,000
for
E expences
a total of 117,57,200. Entimated operating emenses (only
for the same poridi are 21,616,300. Asmeny
to date is as follows:
For Period 17
June 50
67 30
For Period 1 July 50 to 30 June 11
For Period 1 July 51 to 30 June (52
For Period 1 July 52 to 30 June 53
TOTALS INCLUDE 30 JUM 1963
AN
☐
2,161,036
Total
105.23
2,340,07407
12,577,30400
218,04
127,127,149.17
J
RFE's principal install-ti are its
in bova insting
velay over at
and production equipment, located in ich, ey; brocanting
a
facilities mainline in. Hey York City and th
Lisbon, Portugal.
In Germany, tranzmitters me in operation at Bolskircher and Biblis,
Miile monitoring, recording and receiving funds the
**
and boosburg. In Portugal, the and 100 by
bolex is
at Gloria, idle receiving/monitoring facilities and duction/ecting
are at baxoqueria and sipon, respectively.
Original carital investment in dermany as
30 June 1650 mounted
Bates. Original carital, For Portugalns of 30 June 1980
$198,193.10

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_406.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!
F
"
SECURITY INDENIMATION
TRIBUTICKS
RFE in a major instrument in total U.S. political and psychological
warfare efforts directed at Central and Bustern Europe. it has contri-
buted in the following w
s
RFE made an intensive sign of Stalin'e donth and linked
this event with deal of Cold and the Inges of Fleck.
During the intensive period of the Stalin story 28 was on the air
24 hours with all its 21mitters on a single frequency, which
wad itched continuously from country to country. It beat all
Western press agencies by 21 hours in annoumming Gottwald's ill-
ness and is usually about 2 hours ahead of VOA and BRC in announcing
events of major importance.
Radio Free Europe was the first to inform the Agency of the
recent riots in Pilson, the shuffle of the
Comunist
Covernment, ct.c.
RFE han contributed in the launching of two balloon operations:
one in the stemmer of 1951, w barrages of alloons were hurled at
Czechoslovakia and Polari, Another on 1 July 1953, when thousands
of balloons were launched into Czechoslovakia.
:
PRE in an effective machinery through which the U... Government
can work unofficially as cannot be done through TOA or RIAS.
In
NFB gives hope to those behind the Curtain and its broad-
casts have provided incentives to escape: c.6. eshape of two Polish:
Pilots, Freedom Train.
o
interrogation of refugees al escape from behind the iron
Curtain. Escapees often peter to go to RFE reception center rather
than more official .. outfits. Interrogation reports are of
immence value to intellige to formulation of U.S. policy.
L
aj.
RFE quidada: nt analyses of current situn-
tions and lines to be followed in broadcasts. of extrene value to
U.S. Government.
!

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_43.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
SEGUFT
2
SECURITY INFORMATION%
betray themselves unnecessarily and tragically. He said that he had
heard that these people had promoted behind the Curtain a whispering
campaign among the Poles at the time of the recent elections to the
effect that the elections were to be postponed. He seemed to think
this an unnecessary rick for those who took part in it. He also said
that he had been approached by these same people who asked him to urge
the Poloy by broadcast to cross out the names of the Communist candi-
dates when they voted. He learned only later, he said, that the system
of voting at the last election was such that in order to cross out
candidates it was necessary to step out of the ballot box and do it in
the open before witnesses. He had in any event refused such suggestions.
I got the impression that he feels some of our people are a little
immature.
5. I liked him. As I say, seeing him made me proud of what we
are doing.
: die Braden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
SECURITY IN SOMATION
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_42.jpeg ---
:
:
14-00000
2
SECTET
SECURITY INFORMATION
+
13 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIPECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Conversation with Mr. Jan Nowak
Lele 1306
Executive Borgistry
3-4257
:
1. At your request, I had a conversation today with Mr. Jan
Nowak, head of the Folish radio desk of RFE in Munich. I am sorry
that you did not get to see him. Our conversation reminded me that
our work is terribly important, which is a nice reminder on a busy
afternoon.
-
2. I say "important" because Nowak reviewed with me the letters
he had received from listenors in Poland and these, together with his
Own enormous enthusiasm for the work he is doing, reminded me that our
long days in Washington have an effect on the lives and hopes of people
far away. Nowak, who was in the Polish resistance during the war and
who on one of his thrce escapes from Poland at one time spent several
wesks in Switzerland where he had made contact with your representatives,
later worked for the BBC and he pointed out that at no time during the
war was he given to feel by the BSC the sense of responsibility and
mission which he feels in his job in RFE. He said he was told when
he was brought to RFE that the responsibility for the programs was his
and that if at any time programs went on the air which were irresponsible,
then he would lose his job. He says that when he has questions which
he thinks might influence. United States policy, he confers beforchand
with Griffith and the Americans in Munich, and sometimes arguments ensue,
but he feels, and I am certain he feels sincerely, that he has an equal
share with Americans in a great effort to carry the truth back home..
3. I say "terribly" important because Nowak, like other exiles,
wonders out loud how long our work can continue to have an impact. He
is himself convinced that every Polish soldier is a potential ally of
the West but he wonders, and makes his listener wonder, how long we can
expect this sympathy among a rising generation for which the past is
inexorably fading.
4. Nowak made one point which I am sure he intended for your
ears, that he was afraid that "certain people in Germany" who had
contacts into Poland might lead his friends behind the Certain to
3

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_44.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1:
T
i
:
1
SECURITY INFO
SECRET
NOV 4
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
SUBJECT:
DD/P's Memorandum to you 30 October 1952 entitlod,
"National Committee for Free Europe, RF, and Rolated
Matters"
1. You will be interested to know, I am sure, that Mr. Wisner's friend,
Mr. Georgescu, has recently been most helpful. Through his efforts and the
cooperation of Jim Pekich of SE European Division, I believe that HCPE is on
the threshold of a unified Rumanian National Council.
2. I'm in entire agreement also with Mr. Georgescu's observation on
As you know, Mr. Dolbeare is concerned
the personnel sot-up within NCFE.
about his role. He is the first to admit that his strength is ebbing, and
I think it must be agreed also that Mr. Wolbeare has
that he should retire.
done a splendid job, a job that would have been, and will still be, difficult
for a man in the prime of life.
I have discussed this problem in confidence with Francis B. Stevens.
As a result of my inquiries about a possible successor to Mr.. Dolbearo, Mr.
Stevens suggests that Mr. Nathaniel Penistone Davis is a person eminently
qualified to do this job. I would be interested in knowing whether Mr.
Wisner knows this man.
'
3. I believe also, Hr. Georgescu's misgivings about Mr. Yarrow aro wall-
founded. In the last two months, Mr. Yarrow has taken an increasingly prom-
inent position in Mr. Dolbeare's Division, as a result of Mr. Dolbeare's
physical inability to do a full time job. Mr. Yarrow is blunt, and inclined
to be dictatorial. He has a predilection for direct action in situations
that rightly call for finesse and careful development. For these reasons,
In
in addition to the fact that he is of Russian extraction and speaks with a
heavy accent, I am convinced that he should not replace Mr. Dolbeare.
my opinion, under the right leadership, Mr. Yarrow could continue to make a
valuable contribution to NCFE's dealings with emigres as an administrator.
I believe that such a solution is politically possible; for NCFE
in this phase of its activities is going through a period of groping and
hope that the start we have made in working out a
painful reorientation.
re-statement and a re-direction of activities within Division of Emigre Re-
lations will provide a program of positive projects which will supply ammuni-
tion for psychological warfare, both behind the Iron Curtain and in the Free
World. Such a program will call for an efficient administrator versed in
exile affairs -- a position for which Mr. Yarrow is well qualified. Under
the political leadership of a person of Mr. Davis' caliber, for direct dealings
with enigres, I feel that the Division of Emigre Relations will be able to
clear up present inefficiencies and contribute effectively to NCFE's over-all
mission.
SECRET
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
Chief, 10/TONIC
'

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!
:
CHET SECURITY INFORMATI DA
29 October 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: MR. THOMAS W. BRADEN
SUBJECT:
International Organizations Division
Change of name of Baltic Panels
With reference to your memorandum of October 15,
1952 concerning the desire of the Baltic Panels to
change their names to the Committee for Free Estonia,
Latvia, and Lithuania, respectively, I wish to inform
you that the Department porceives no reason to oppose
such a change.
It is suggested however, that NCPE insist that the
new names for the Baltic Panels be precisely those
mentioned in your memorandum of October 15. It is our
feeling that if the panels-wore to be called National
Committous, for example, confusion might arise with
respect to other organizations from these countries
already in existence and the impression might be
created that the committees are of greater political
significance than we wish them to be.
JOYCE
ROBERT P. JOYCE
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
SECRET SECURITY INFORMATION
=
PAR

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
SECRET
Sends Lin
individual. Ho referred to Cinier as a
,
too kick" -- whatever
that means in Prooklynese. He also raid that Siniger is a "prouto.
intellectual" and a "cuddle-beɛded liberal". ionel expressed him-
ralf as teing annoyed that a pereen like per should be used by
the 3, ency while a person like himself of ould be imored.
3. I hear that toward Clapin is back at work but that his
physical condition is not at all food and at the cause of the
paralytic affect was not determined by the doctorn.
HOND
8
4. At the Director's staff meeting his morning, he a, ain
raised the matter of our using the American, iurita, e Foundation for
cover and pónsd bly fund-raising purposes in connection wit
CA and the "reedom Crusade. He explained for the berofit of Mr.
Dulles that the directors of the American Heritage Foundation have
met recently and agreed to provide assistance to us and to arke
available to us their sponsorship, good name, etc. According to
the Director, Mr. Pan Pryor has been primarily responsible for
this decision although Winthrop Aldrich and D'Arcy Brophy were to
sono extent instrumental. The Executive ecretory of the Foundation,
who was scheduled to visit Washington on 12 betober, will be coming
dan suretime Bhortly after Novembur.h. It that time we should te
ready with concrete proposals as to the manner in which we would
like to sake use of the Foundation and its various anneta.
would, of cournu, want to coordinate whatever is developed in this
connection with the work that Henry Ford has undertaken to do for
the Crusade this year. After some discusation it was agreed at the
nooting that the An ricam Lurita Foundation might to brought in
either during the forthcoming rusade campaign or immediately there-
after, depending upon that should appear to be most desirable. At
the very least we should use the foundation for cover purposes,
since by advertising the support of this well-known organization,
we would gain a very solid and substantial point of attribution eB
the source of funds. He might also wish to channel funds into the
Crusade or directly into one or both of the two committees through
the American Heritage Foundation. (This would require some straight-
ning with the Treasury Departint authorities to guarantee
against any subsequent investigation.) Finally, the crusade might
te conducted in future years under the Farmerhead of and in the
name of the American Heritage Foundation. The bi shots in the
Foundation would not want to work at fund-raising themselves, and
It
they have been assured that we would not ask them to co 80.
would be up to us to provide the nuts and bolts of the effort.
cc: [/?p
SECRET
Security Information
PRASY G. VISUE
Deputy Director (Plans)
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
• before further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry,
FROM:
1.
CPP
TO
C/10
2.
DD/P
C-IO
ROOM
NO.
ALC'O
DATE
POU'D
NOW/1852
8 NOW 1952
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
no cos
13
270782)
JWB
16/237/24 532
29 Oct
COMMENTS
"ho a matter of incidental info,
big
new learson gave a his plus
contributions to the Crusade
on his TV program lost night
(Nov. 9)
a.c.u
8.
8.
7.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
18.
FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1950
"
WG OFFICE
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_45.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Caturity Information
Cctober 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, International Organisations Division.
SUBJECT:
National Committee for Free Furope, 1,
rolated minttors.
and
i
1. This memorandum is to inform you of a number of items which
have recently come to my attention and to wich I think you of old
give consideration and take necessary action. V. C. (Fica) Ceorgescu,
who is an old Friend and a very helpful consultant of the 'gency,
came to see no the other evening and discussed certain aspects of
Fica has been working on both fections of the Mizantanz in an
effort to bring them together, and I think that his criticism is, on
the solo, constructive. He states that entirely apart from the quen-
tion of factionalism among the Rumanian groups and other national
groups, there is the treatest amount of inefficiency at the deck lovel
of NC. This results from having too many poleans and diplomats
in positions of authority and too few pèrams of any practical experi-
ence; too much time is communed and too much of the general effort
goes completely to waste as the result of endless political discus-
alona, much of it entirely theoretical. It would be desirable to
review the entire personnel sot-up within NOW at an early date and
place in charge of the various denks Individuals who are capable of
administering their people and winning a row. Juch persons could
to advised and assisted by the politicians and the diplomats, but
they would have the responsibility for getting things done. Finally,
hica told an very confidentially that he thought Colbeare, who has
never been strong, was getting weaker and weaker, and he voiced some
alugivings about Pernie Yarrow. No said that be aces not know
Yarrow at all well, but has the impression from others that farrow
is high-handed and dictatorial in his dealings and that its back-
ground is not particularly suitable for a person who is to hold a
position of so much responsibility in dealing with Southeastern
Luropean nationals.
2. I think I have already told you that Victor Plesel, the
writer of the hottile pieces wich you trou, ht to my attention,
complained about the treatment that he received You Finis "arr, who
he said had led him to believe that he was poing to be called. úpun
for advice and assistance to the Agency. There were no follow-
ups and hiesel was miffed. Miesel also singled out for sharp
attack Captain Giniger, who he said he believed was in a high
place in CTA and who was a thoroughly incompetent and undesirable
.
SECRET
Atormation
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
#
P. 6450
Chief, Cover Division, Plans/FI
Chief, Contact Division, m
Crusade for Freedom
¦
19 December 1952
HII-521
The attached extract from the 12 December 1952 issue of
Fifth Aruty's Domestic Intelligence Report is forwarded as being
of possible interest to your office.
Encl: 1
E. M. ASHCHAFT

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_49.jpeg ---
14-00000.
SECURITY INFOGGIATHI
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Crusade for Freedom
29 October 1952
1.
While in Detroit yesterday, I talked with Charles Moore, who
is the Director of Public Relations for Ford Motor Company, and also
with Henry Ford. I was merely paying a friendly call on Moore but he
raised the matter of the Crusade and asked Mr. Ford to come in and
talk about it. They are both very unhappy with Mr. Walsh, who is
Admiral Miller's man on the Crusade and whom Miller socured from the
State Department, and I also gathered the general impression of dis-
"If wo had known
satisfaction with Miller and his whole effort
what kind of an outfit we were working with, wo wouldn't have taken
it over.1 On the other hand, both Mr. Ford and Moore said that they
were going ahead full steam and intended to see the job through to
the best of their ability".
--
"
2. I think there is no action to be taken here and merely pass
this on for your information, but it does bring to mind again what I
think in growing evidence that the Crusade is more trouble than it is
worth.
3. I think this ought to be the last Crusade for Freedom and
We are now taking
that we ought to give thought to alternatives.
elops to take m
For Free Asia out of the Crusade next
year, substituting a permanent fund-raising office in San Francisco,
token donations from three Agency foundations, and making a serious
Somo
attempt to obtain some money from Asian groups and contacts.
other cover is obviously needed and we are thinking in terms of the
American Heritage Foundation or other possibilities that may occur.
We should take similar steps for the National Committee for a Free
Europe.
E
Thomas
unas Braden
i
THOMAS W. PRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
2

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_53.jpeg ---
14-00000
1 !
:
I
SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET
27 October 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
SUBJECT:
President's Committee on Immigration and Naturalization
1. The attached memorandum, greatly modified in form by the
General Counsel of NCFE, is to be presented tomorrow afternoon at
an open hearing of the President's Committee which is conducting
hearings on the McCarran Bill.
2, I was informed of this proposed presentation on Friday
afternoon, October 17. I obtained the attached from Mr. Greenlea,
NCFE General Counsel, today. NCFE does not know that Mr. Greenlea
has been in touch with us and should not know.
3. I suggest that you review, with Mr. Wisner, whether NCFE
should make such a presentation. In essence, the presentation is
an attack on the McCarran Bill. I suggest that, perhaps, NCFE
should not testify for two reasons:
a.
b.
This is close to a clear example of a tax exempt
charitable organization, attempting to influence
legislation and;
The political implications are liable to be an
embarrassment for CIA.
4. Apparently, NCFE is making this presentation in the hopes
of receiving wide publicity so they will be in a position to say to
the emigrees with whom they deal, "look what we are trying to do for
you."
5. I urge your rapid concern, for the presentation is due to be
made tomorrow afternoon.
SECRET
William P. Durkee
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
Chief, IO/TONIC
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_52.jpeg ---
14-00000
will be discontinued when HICG des out of existence, and they should
not be reostablished. You will remember that at the hearings whion
considered Nis 1953 budget, the officials of NCFE asked for 2500,000
to cover the expected loss of much privileges and because we felt that
this was unjustified, we naked md were granted the right to retain
this money in the CIA reserve ponding further justification.
5. Mr. Scott's explaint that the Information Service of RVE
has been too expensive and nnive is probably correct. In part this
is the result of CIA's inability, for justifiable security rensons,
to make information on a Lerge scale available to RE. However, the
Information Service is being reorganized. There is reason to believe
that excellent profeandonal nommen, such as Russell Hill and Ed
Chamberlayne will provide the computence necessary for in increass
in efficiency.
6. In sum, Mr. Scott's criticisms and complaints seen a mixture
of fact and fiction animated by a porconal antagonism. His ls but one.
of a mumber of such attacks by former employees. Our own approach to
Radio Free Europe should be not so much an assessment of past success
and failures, as an exacination of future opportunities. A powerful
instrument has boon created, in the main successfully, in an incredibly
short time. Where it goes from here, giving due consideration to
criticism such as Scoty 3, seems to us to be our priority task.
!
i
i
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_50.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, EE DIVISION
CHIEF, SE DIVISION
SUBJECT:
CHIEF, IO DIVISION
Attempts of persons outside the Agency to influence
Agency and State Department policy with respect to
National Committed for a Froo Europe
Not
und
1. I have had reports from several sources that persons outside
the Agency and outside the State Department have attempted to influence
Agency operations arid State Department policy in respect to the National
Committee for a Free Europe. Two of these persons, it is reported, are
Carmel Offie and Maynard Barnos. .
.
2. To the extent that Mosers. Offle and Barnes are aware of our
continuing relations with NCFE, their awareness constitutes a danger
to our successful conduct of the operation. I therefore ask you and
members of your Division to refrain from any contact with these gentle-
men or with others who, by virtue of their suspicions or knowledge but
without any official capacity whatever, are attempting to grind their
personal axes through the National Committee for a Free Europe.
3. I have also had reporté from several sources that members of
this. Agency who happen to hold strong personal views on the conduct of
exile activities by NCFE have, in their direct relations with the
exiles, encouraged the exiles to oppose NCFE decisions and policies.
Please transmit to your respective staffs my strong aversion to this
kind of in-fighting. I call your attention to the agreement signed
by myself and Mr. Georg Kennan of the State Department on 18 February
1949, which reads in part:
"Exiles and refugees will be referred to the New York
Committee for all matters of an operational nature,
including the provision of support and facilities for
themselves and their activities."
The same memorandum states that "Certain operational activities
will not properly fall within the province of the New York Committee" and
reserves these activities to this Agency, but these reserved operational
activities wore clearly not intended to embrace the encouragement of the
exiles to fight off decisions made by the Committee as to "the provision
of support and facilities for themselves and their activities".
1
our
4. Please also convey to members of your staff that shall not
tolerate further violations of the established policy eat Sarth above.
If there in his whatever for these reports, Jan
will all agere
that f
licat are led resolve
File the aging.
differences incl
you
inside
anny
FRANK C. WIS
Deputy Director (Plans)

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_51.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
sec covering mems
- page 2 in
Chrono 21 Out
Analysis of Memorandum by Mr. Creighton Scott
The following memorandum, I believe, discussse most of the
points raised by Mr. Scott.
1. Scripts prepared in Munich are almost never read by Americans
before broadcast al though the goneral content of each broadcast is
agreed upon in programing conferaicos between the American and axila
#taffs. The reasons why the broadcasts are not read by Anoricans
before they go on the air are as follows
3. Because the natural inclination of Americans is to
change the broadcasts, and such changes, RFF officials feal,
are likely to lessen the "ganulno" quality of axile broad.
casts for the listeners.
b.
Because the exiles fool themselves to be patriote
working for their countries, and the submission of scripts
to Amoricana before they are broadcast would be regarded by
the exiles as casting doubt upon their allegiance and fervor.
The American staff believes that it can exercise policy contral by
suggestions during program discus:dons rather than by making dolo-
tions and corrections in the scripts themselves.
2. During my trip to Europe in June, I asked Hr. W. E. Griffith,
Political Advisor for HFE, to institute the service of regularly
translating the most sensitive RFE broadcasts after the fact. Ha
has complied with this request and CIA now receives Englian trans-
lations of Munich scripts within a month after broadcast. CIA also
receives an immediate teletypo summary of all Munich broadcasts, as
well as a weekly consolidated summary of all broadcasts. To provide
for immediate English translation of all AFE programs after tho fact
would require an enormous staff of translators.
3. No doubt RFE has made the mistakes Hr. Scott mentions in
connection with the items about the weakness of the Iron Curtain and
the ease of crossing it, and the Czechoslovakian curroney devaluation.
On the first point, Mr. Scott's dates are in error, for RFE did not
go on the air until July 1, 1950. Assuming that he means that such
broadcasts were made from that date until April 1951, it smuld be
noted that this was the very beginning of RSS when all of its broad-
casts originated in New York. Such broadcasts certainly are not
being continued. I assume they were the result of inexperience.
Tis

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2
Vital to the work and well being of the National Committee
for a Free Europe are its approximately two thousand alien associates.
60 percent of these aliens are in Europe, with the rost residing ei-
ther temporarily or permanently in the United States. At the present
time over one hundred of these aliens residing here faco imminent do-
portation.
It might be inserted parenthetically at this point that all
of these aliens presently fooing deportation have attempted to remain
within the spirit and the letter of the law, but because of the absur-
dities of the law have been forced into the position of being wilful
violators of it. We do not speak, either now or at any point in this
disoussion, about evadors of, or fugitives from. Justice, but shall
only refer to individuals of good faith, attempting to the best of
their ability to conform to the rules and regulations of the country
which they believe, often mistakenly, to be the refuge of the afflicted.
At various times during the history of our organization it
has been necessary for the National Committee or its subsidiaries to
ask certain aliens with particular talents to come to the United States
particular talents to come to the United
There
on extremely short notion.
They were, of course, admitted as visitors.
+5.
the len
I
After these glions had arrived in the United States, they were immediate-
wi
ly faced with the problem of attempting in some manner to regularise
fum (raja
(t
their status here so that trips back and forth from Europe for visa re-
newal purposes would not be necessitated. Under the present immigration
Us
The complex has
law the only possibility of obtaining such reputerization was by having
ki
change
out

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_54.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
The National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc., was formed
in 1949 when a group of private oiticons joined together for positive.
action against Soviet enslavement.
It concentrates its efforts on the
100 million Central and Eastern Europeans today living undor inhuman
conditions of force and fear. This tyranny, imposed by Soviot Russia
in flagrant violation of her soloan guarantees, procludes tho endur-
ing world penco desired by free men overywhere. The National Committee
for a Free Europe is the American peoples' answer to the Kromlin's des-
potio rule.
The Committee seeket
(1) To pierce the Iron Curtain with messages of moral and practical
of
value through the facilities of Radio Free Europe, thus taking
tho fight to the enemies' camps
(2) To build for the future by educating young refugees from Com-
munism through the Mid-European Studies Center hore in the United
(3)
Co
i
States, and the Free European University in Exile in Strasbourg,
Exile in Strasbourg,
France. In this manner we attempt to preserve the cultural herit-
age of the past which the enemy seeks to destroy;
To develop political unity and a dynamic platform of aims and prin-
ciples among the exile groups through the Division of Exile Rela-
tionsi
(4) To assemble, analyze and distribute knowledge about current con-
ditions in the captive area;
(5) To create active publio support, both moral and material, for these
activities.
:
+

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_56.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
The present
it ispit.
to safe quand
the rele
in the U.S.
If an alian
live a
ma
ted in
are joble
->>>
the alien apply at an American Consulate in Canada, await the issuance
of a visa number, and then having the alien personally pick up the visa
at the appropriate consulato. This proosduro usually took from a year
w lu...
"\
method
to 18 months. But this mode of regulartcation-will conso under the new
law, sinos allons will not be admitted into the United States from Canada
without having first completed certain residential requirements thoro.
The only manner of safeguarding the residence of an alien
visitor in the United States at prosont is to attempt to got unlimited
extensions of his visitor's viae. This is of course impossible.
Tho
allen finds himself, therefore, in the position of being deportable to
the country from which he came, and in most onses after having stayed in
the United States for over a year, the respective governments will refuse
him permission to return. In the end the allon finds himself in a posi-
tion worse than the one which he enjoyed while rosiding in a Displacod
Persons oamp in Germany.
Students supported by our Mid-European Studies Contor find them-
selves in an oven more embarrassing position. They are allowed to come
to the United States as students providing their re-entry permits to the
countries from which they come are still valid. Any student who comes
to take advantage of our scholarships comes for at least a period of
from two to four years and is therefore unable to maintain his residence
sch
abroad and keer his scholarship at the same time. They soon arrivo at
the point where they cannot return to Europe, cannot continue their studios
here, and are constantly harrassed by officers of the Immigration Service.
Those students studying at our Froe Europe University in Exile in Strasbourg

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_57.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
cannot come to the United States to continuo thoir studies at gradunto
sṇhools here, because most of them are chargeable-to-heavily oversub-
scribed quotas.
tr...
• W. Gy of te
-
fo
Our work here in the National Committon for a Free Europe is
essentially psychological.
Our ansoolates in Radio Free Europe, the
Division of Exile Rolations, etc., ornnot do offioiont, offootive or
while in cutt
-
productive work when they are constantly being harrassed by officials
of the Immigratiop service. When their stay in the United States is_on
Unde
←
day to day beols they cannot devote their full energies to the work
for which they onmo to this country. while it to brus that most of them
intend to return to the country of their origin whon Communist domination
but until the...
is overthrown theres they must have nome assurance that they oon remain
poncofully here until that moment. Thoroforo, It would soon appropriate
that some provision be made in the immigration, lows that students and
fitting these cations
temporary visitors in the United States be allowed to adjust their status
to that of temporary, If not permanent, residence in the United States.
Another aspect of the Inw which should be-considered-to-the
Mony
feat-that Mingy of the exile leaders of various Iron Curtain countrios
were admissable to the United Statos undor the Displaced Persons Act of
1948 as amended. However, when asked by the Imalgration authorition
whether they intended to remain in the United States tomporarily or por-
manently, they answered in all honesty that they intended to remain here
only until their own
omo
munist tyranny. Of course, by their own admission they were therefore
automatically barred from adjusting their status from that of temporary
0 cuntries had been liberated from the yoke of Com-
visitor to permanent resident. In the case of Our student asscolates,
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_59.jpeg ---
14-00000
->
:
quotas of only 100, and these quotas are almost all oversubscribed to the
year 2000.
Should the mortgagos laid on those quotes by the Dispinood
Persons Act be removed, or if Hungarians, for example, were able to bor-
row from the British quota, so should be able to bring to the United
States meny allons possessing particular skills whose services are ur-
gently needed by this organization. Many of our allons are highly skillod
technical, professional, medioal or scientific men whose training, expor-
ionoe and ability would most certainly be prospectively beneficial to the
United Staton.
:
It is because of the heavily oversubsoribed condition of the
quotes of Hungary, Bulgaria, oto., that most of the applications for visas,
made as long as two years ago in American Consulatos in Canada, are being
returned unprocessed, with the notation that no notion can be taken on
their application due to the imminent approach of the offective date of
the new law.
Neither the present 1mr, nor the new law makes proper provision
for Displaced Persons who are bona fide visitors to the United States.
None of those people have passports from their own countries, since all
of them have rejected the political party presently holding sway there.
As a result they are traveling on French, German, or other free country
affidavits of identity or travel documents. Before a visa can be extended
under the law, the travel documents and ro-entry permits must be valid for
a period of sixty days beyond the date of application. These countries
will not extend these documents since the bearers are not nationale of
the issuing country. This, in effect, means that these visitors can only
:
'
J

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
CATIAL 226
SECURITY AND
"An S ". CHEN approached the Head of t
versity Security Section, and
A-Dame
Botre
rested
a list of all Chinese nationals attending the
University. Chen represented himself as a member
of the STUDENTS RELATIONS SECTION, COMMITTRE FOR A
FREE ASIA, INC., 105 Narket Street, San Francisco,
Californin. CHEN stated that his reason for
requesting such a list who that his organization
was active in promoting better relations between
Chinese nationals attending colleges and universities
in the United States and the American people. Hotro
Dame received for a second time a pamphlet from the
COMMITTEE FOR A FREE ASIA entitled, "Asia in the
World Today'. Officials at Notre Dame have also
been contacted by the NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR A FREE
EUROPE, 110 West 57th Street, New York 19, New York.
This organization requested a list of all foreign
instructors and students presently instructing or
attending courses at the University. A business
card attached to a pamphlet revealed the following
information: Miss Ellen M. STUDELY, 1223 East 57th
Street, Chicago 37, Illinois, Chinese Student and
Alumni Service, Chicago Area, ComeITIES ON FRIENDLY
RELATIONS AMORO FOREIGN STUDENTS, 29 Broadway,
New York 7, New York. There is no information in
0-2 files this Headquarters relative to STUDELY or
CHEN."
CUR

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_58.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 5
5 -
:
unsingistin
are we
6
!
E
they are obliged by the Committed as a roquisite to receiving a scholar-
A
ship, to sign a statement agreeing to return to the country of their
origin whon liberation comes so that their training, will bo of direct
help in the cause of building a free world. It is indud unfortunate
wettin
uni
any
that bath the present low and the forthocing one mokome provision
for political refugees except in the once of those individuals who are
admitted to the United States under diplomatic standing and subsequent-
ly the service of their government.
win
At the present moment individuals awaiting adjustment under
thia particular soction of the ..-law are in an extremely precarious
position. All of them have a lifetime of political activity behind
them, and therefore the administrative delay in processing their appli-
ontions, completing investigations, oto., han boon interminable. Now,
most of them are receiving notices from the Department of Justice stat-
ing that since their applications have not been processed within the time
limit, they are now eligible for deportation proceedings which will be
effected forthwith.
11th
Both the present and the future immigration laws make no pro-
vision for administrative discretion in the enforcement of the deporta-
tion laws. Should tho looal commissioner be allowed to use his dis-
orationery powers in the matter of deporting individuals such as those
discussed, the problem in great part would be cleared op i l
A
The national quotes system is completely out of accord with
present worldwide conditions. Almost all of the Iron Curtain countries,
with the possible exceptions of Czechoslovakia and Poland, have annual
Dobc
5
desave
wat to
72

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
J
:
:
OION
23 October 1952
MEMORANTEX FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Maynard Barnes and Carmel Offie
1. In conversation the other day you asked me through what
channel Kaynard Barnes and Carmel Offio were stating their opinions
on the matter of NCFE's request to move the administrative head-
quarters of the exile countries from Washington to New York, and
who was listening to Barnes and Offie.
2. The channel seems to be the Southeastern European Division
and in particular Colonel Yatsevitch, SE/OPP. The Southeastern
European Livision maintains an extremely skeptical view of NCFE
activities in the exile field and has gone to considerable trouble,
through exiles as well as through Barnes and Offic, to create the
greatest faible objection not only to the recent move of the
exiles b _UCFE in general. I am attaching an article by Edgar
A. Mowrer which was written at the bonest of Mr. Offie and was
originally intended to be the first of a series. We have been
successful in having the series idea dropped.
'
3. While I believe that there is some justification in the
points the Division continually makes about the exile record of
the New York Committee, I think the inter-governmental squabble.
which is used by the Division's repeated attempts to use exiles,
members of the State Department, and others as a sounding board for
its own Lack of sympathy with NCFE makes it difficult for the
National Committee to fulfill its charter and for CIA to control
· day-to-day operations without interference from the State Department
and others from outside the Agency.
4. I suggest that you send the attached memorandum to the
Chiefs of EE, SE and IO. It is worded in such a manner that it
will not reveal this reference.
2 Attachments
i
1. Mowrer article.
2. Suggested memo.
homas Riaden
TIONAS W. ERADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_60.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
;
:
N
FL
-7-
romain for a period at from six to nino months, and then at return to
Europe, oftentimes without being able to complete the work for which they
came',
Finally, it would soon that some provision could be mie for
the rapid processing of the visas of both prospective immigrents and pros-
pective visitors so that in case of necessity an ellen oon to brought
quickly to the United States without the usual two year delay.
Generally speaking, if some drastio ohenges are act made in
the Immigration laws at the earliest possible moment, we cen foresee the
virtual disbanding the timel Councils Division of this crenization,
and
a serious curtailment of the quality of the broadcasts from Radio
Proe Europe, and, alikit 16 pot à propos to the present matter, we..
wchil
should like to point out that these broadcasts are making a terrifio im-
-
paot behind the Iron Curtein. One has only to read the virulent etteoks
against our organization printed in the Communist press all over the world
to be assured of their offectiveness. The propaganda value to the Com-
munist cause of the mass deportations now being planned of these well-known
oxiles is of youras imesgurable.
When Public Ley 414 was being debuted in the Congress, it was
submitted that the present Inmigration and Nationality Act res one riddled
with inconsistonoles and completely engulfed in "rod tape." e respect-
fully submit that the forthcoming low is full of even more inconsistencies,
is completely unaware of present world conditions, will in effect stop all'
immigration except from those scuntries which are socially acceptable, and
will create an impassible labyrinth of restrictive red tape.
there
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
CUE
WEV
SECURITY INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR:
CHIEF, IO
FROM
SUBJECT
13 October 1952
Chief, ROM/OIS
Exchange of Intelligence Information between the
NCFE and the DD/P Offices
oing to
Dunker
-
1. The National Committee for a Froe Europe is the reservoir of
a great wealth of intelligence information, particularly in the field
of psychological warfare. A four-day survey of the NCFS conducted by
an OIS case offiour indicated that three NCF: components the Research
and Publications Sorvice, the Mid-European Studios Center, and the
Radio Free Europe - can make a very valuable contribution to the opera-
tional intelligence required by the DD/P offices.
2.
It is the purpose of this memorandum to suggest a procedure for
the most effective use of the NCPS intelligence potential. The most
practical approach seems to be as follows:
a. At this time it does not appear necessary to establish a
continuous flow of raw and finished intelligence from the NCFE
to the VD/P offices. Rather, we would like to use NCFE facilities
whenever individual cases indicate that such action is advisable.
b. We would like to maintain a direct relationship with the
NCPE for the purpose of onlisting its support in the work on our
individual cases. When the nature of the case indicates that the
NCFE can make a valuable contribution to it, we could make arrango
ments through the thief of IO/TONIC, to make direct contact with
one of the security-cleared NCPE officers. A permanently-designated
OIS case officer (A. Snatton and/or H. Knoepfmacher) would then
proceed to New York to discuss the substantive research problems
in the NCFE and reach an agreement on the scope of NCFS, support.
3. It is recognized that the final authority on all contacts with
the NCFE rests with the Chief of IO/TONIC, and that the latter may direct
and limit such contacts whenever he desires.
3
:
ADATION
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_64.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
MEMORANDAIM FOR: C/FI
SEGARY
Security Informatics
FROM
• C/RQM/PI
SUBJECT
al
libro orig
88
DD/P807
OCT 10 1952
Survey of the National Committoo for a Frog
Europe
2. This masorandum sorvos to inform you of a four-day survey
made of the National Committee for a Free Europe by Alexenler Chatton
of RQH/OIS. The survey has uncovered a great wealth of information,
contained both in raw files and finished reports, which in of
operational intelligence interest. Wo are now making arrangements,
through the TO Division, for continuing access to the NCFE files
and for direct liaison with the HCNE Staff.
2. In the course of his conversation with Shatton, the
Promident of the NCFE (Admiral Harold Hillor) expressed concern over
the fact that he had not been notified of Shatton's arrival and
stated that he does not look with favor at CIA individuals working
in the NCFS without his knowledge. Although Shatton informed hin
that his visit had been cleared with the IO Division, Admiral Miller
remained somewhat unconvinced that the arrangements had properly
been made. I suggest that this misunderstanding be brought to the
attention of the PD/P, so that he may be informed of the facts in
the event the matter is brought up by Admiral Millor in his contacts
with the DCI and the DDCI.
3. Mr. Shatton's visit to the NCFE headquarters took place on
16, 17, 15 and 19 September.
SECRET
Security temat
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_63.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
CUATION
:
4.
We suggest that, for the purpose of meeting security requiro-
ments, the two OIS case officers assigned to NCP liaison be given
permanent cover which would be arranged by the NCPA Personnel Officer
and the Chief of 10/TONIC.
We are,
5. It is recognized that the relationship between W/OIS and
the NCFS must be based on mutual exchange of information.
therefore, prepared to provide such intelligence research support to
the NCFE as may be given within socurity limits and our manhour capa-
bilitica. The requests for intelligence support from the NCPE would
be channeled to RM/018 through the Chief of 10/TONIC.
6. Our proposals contained in this momorandum have been discussed
with the Chief of 10/TONIC and an understanding has been reached on all
points covered. It is requested that the suggested procedure be
approved.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_66.jpeg ---
"
14-00000
1
Inter
.!!
1 Oit re
reid
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, IO Division
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
NCFE-SE Division Conference on Rumanian
Refugee Situation
Meno to Chief, IOD, Subject: Current U. s.
Attempt to Form a Unified Rumanian Refugee
Organisation, dated 12 September 1952.
1. It is requested that the referenced memorandum be
forwardod to the NCFE for study prior to the conference (ref,
para. 8) between NCFE representatives and personnel of this
Division.
2. Due to the importance of the negotiations with the
Rimanians, no action should be taken on the plan outlined in
the memorandum until after the conference is held. The Division
representative to be assigned on TDY in New York (ref, para. 7)
will be designated prior to the conference.
3. We have been informed that Mr. Visolanu has not received
an acknowledgment of his letter and proposal. It is suggested that
the NCFE write Mr. Visoianu, expressing appreciation for his com-
munication, and inform him that the NCFE has been studying varioum
proposals and hopes that within the next few weeks further dis-
cussions can be arranged.
F
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_65.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
wr, soct:
ODP 72
Twis
4 October 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division,
P & P Staff
SUBJECT:
National Committee for Free Europe's Request for
Funds to Build a Gymnasium at the Free University-
in-Exile; Roclamer of Admiral Miller.
1.
I believe that I told Mr. Braden last evening of the tolo-
phone call which I had received from Admiral Miller and of what I
had said in response to his request for funds to build the gymnasium.
I want to make it clear that I offered him no specific encouragement,
and confined my remarks to a statement that if he wished to draw up
a proper application we would study it very carefully. I told him
that this seemed to us an unnecessary expense and one which I would
find difficult to defend with the Director in light of our present
economy drive.
2. I should greatly appreciate a thorough staff job being
done on this matter to relieve me of the necessity of thinking up
Will some-
all of the arguments pro and con, especially the latter.
one please dig up in the Congressional Records the speechos mado
during the last session of Congress in condemnation of the Stato De-
partment's lavish approach to the educational and cultural exchange
program? If we were ever forced to defend this Free. University
program, I think we would be extremely vulnerable on the score of
This is
having spont $50,000 for a gymnasium or anything like it.
the icing on the cake and has the sound of being definitely in the
lumiry category. There is also the very questionable wisdom of our
spending additional money on "permanent plant", when we cannot do
sure how long we will be able to continue our support of this enter-
prise, nor for that matter how long the present flow of student
material will continue.
3. Please
--
let us sharpen up our thinking and our pencils
as well. In the final analysis I shall probably have to veto this
proposition, and will certainly do so unless it is much more con-
vincingly supported than heretofore. However, I would like some
help on this.
(Signed) FRANK B. WISHER
FRANK O. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
I

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_68.jpeg ---
14-00000
4. It is therefore recommended that the sum of $60,000 be
released to NCFE to enable them to continue payments as already
agrood. If the support for the ICFTU in Exile should to tominated,
funds remaining in HCFE's hands can be applied to other proposed
activition now held for justification by CIA.
:
Attachments
Reference mess with
attachmento.
IO/TONI C: WPD: jp/eh
(24 Sept 52)
Distribution
Orig & T
IO/TONIC
CO
RI
-
Addressee
200
1 00
-1.00
->
GERALD B. HILLER
Chief
Political and Psychological Warfare
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_67.jpeg ---
14-00000
25 Sept. 52
MADRANÍUM PORT DEPUTY WIRECTOR (PLANE),
SUBJECTI
REFERENCE:
Request for Budget Revision for NCFE
Mano to DD/A and DD/P from Comptroller 13 Sopt. 52
1. Paragrapho 1, 2 and 4 of the subject memorandum requesting
a budget revision for NCFE are explained in the supporting data
attached to that manorandum. Itons totaline 878,343 to be released
from the reserve held by CIA, summarized in those paragraphs, are
for material support of substantive operations already approved.
Release of these items to NCTE is concurred in by International
Organisations Division. It is recommended that the mum of 878,343
bo reloased to NCFE.
2. The item in paragraph 3, 1.e. 260,000 for nine months'
operating expenses from July 1952 through Hare: 1953 for the Inter-
national Contor of Free Trade Unionists in Frilo, Faria, is concurrod
in by the 10 Division. The reason for its ecurrence is as follows:
Support in the mount of 671,000 for the International
Conter of Froo Trade Unionists in Exile through NCFT
was undertaken by a menor for the DD/P dated
1 September 1951, Lowla 3. Tompson, Chief, Special
Projects, OPC.
b. In early June 1952, the matter of continuing opport
for the ICPTU in Pile was revieved by the DDCI,
Admiral Miller and Mr. Breden. It was decided that
the ICFU in Exile would contims to bo subsid sed
in the amount of $60,000 for a mine months' period,
running from July 1952 through March 1953.
3. A cable, IN-34233, from Mr. Braden indicates the Cider of
the Faris Station and Mr. Braden have discussed the possibility of
ending relations with the ICFM in Exile.r. Eraden indientes he
ishes to take up this matter with the DLCI on his return.
į
;
i
5
1
:
LASERT
HI
→

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
ATION
16 December 1958
MEMORANDUM FOR:
MÓRA
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT:
Edward W. Barrett and NCFE
REFERENCE :
Your Note Lated 11 December 1952
LP 1689
I'm informed by Admiral Miller that the matter of Edward W. Barrett
Joining NCFE as a director, was discussed at an Executive Committee meet-
ing a month ago.
No formal decision was made because of considerable opposition so
the matter has been tabled.
SPORET
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_69.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
:
MKIJRANDUI FOR: Chief, IO Division
Library of Congress Rastern European Accessions
SUBJECT:
REFRENCE
Fund Memorandum No. 513, 2 September 1952
1952
I.
1. SE Division has noted with interest that offective August 20, 1952,
the Washington research staff of the NCFE will begin processing books
and publications received from the Iron Curtain countries by the library
of Comes When etong namment e pepe valuable source of infor
mation which this Division is presently unable to exploit, since we have
no personnel with the language qualifications required to review all that
is received for our specific interests.
2. Referenced memorandum indicates that the NCFE has arranged to
microfilm portions of given books containing items of propaganda or
informational value. One copy of the print will be sailed to the New
York research desks, while the original icrofilm will be sent by pouch
to Munich, presumably for RFE. This Division requests that an additional
copy of the print be obtained on a continuing basis by IO for further
analysis by the interested Area Divisions and for pouching to our field
stations which have indicated a specific interest in this material. It
is suggested that the copy be broken down into sections corresponding to
the Area Divisions interested in order that this material may receive
insediate attention by the appropriate Area Division.
3. SE Division would appreciate receiving your comments regarding
this request since we are anxious to utilize this material as soon as
possible and wish to make other arrangements if these suggestions are
found impractical.
Copy to EE
Security
JOHN E. BAKER.
Chief, SE
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_70.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
2 September 1952
MEMORANDUM POR: DEPUTY CHIEF, POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL KARPANE
Assignment of Mobile Radio Pacility (AU-50)
SUBJECT:
1. According to Mesorn. Rowland and Emmons Brown arrangemente
have been made to utilize the MB-50 in Germany.
2.
The completion of the transaction is avaiting a test that
is being undertaken by outside engineers through General AcClelland.
This test, I am told, le necessitated the fact that there is not
available a complete specification of the equipment.
It is estimated by Mr. Brown that the test will be completedi
in a few veeks.
3.
PP/CPY:CLE: tes
Distribution:
Aldresses
Mr. Rowland
✓ AP. Brown, 101
CFY
RI
yut file
original & 1
- 1
1909
L
L
/s/
3. LLOYD EGNER
Acting Calat
Pyschological Staff Division
SECRET
:
}
:
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_71.jpeg ---
i
i
14-00000
i
sinaj file
17 September 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANTUATIONS DIVISION
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Mr. W. P. lurkee, Chief, IO/RONIC
Refugee Stipendiarios of NCES
Secret Memo dtd 12 August 1952 from Chief, 10/TONIC,
to Chief, SE; Subject List of Stipondiaries of NCFE.
1. In compliance with your request of 12 Angust, the referenced
memorandum was circulated to the various interested branches of SE Division.
of the thirteen laumanians listed on stipendiaries of NCFE, only one,
Mr. Brutus Coste, is on the payroll of SE Division. However, it has been
our understanding that Fr. Costo has received no stipend since December,
1751. We would appreciate a further check on the status of Mr. Coste with
respect to his reported stipand. No other duplications were reported.
2. It is requested that in addition to the referenced list of
stipendiarias, 10 Division obtain fron the HOPE and a list of all
refuges employees from within the 55 arer (Rumania, Bulgaria, Albania, and
Yugoslavia) who may be employed in ary capacity, with their salaries and
job titles. Such information hea not been available to the interested
branches in the part, but experience has shown that the availability of
this data on a current basis would be post helpful to the responsible case
officers.
PP: CACrane:bar
Distribution:
Addresses - Orig & 1
SE/PP
RI
2
2.
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_72.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
CRET
:
12 September 1952
HERDRANDUM FOR:
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
CHIEF, PSYCHOLOGICAL STAFF DIVISION
Mr. E. J. Harrison, PT Evaluation
IPTONIC Use of PY Guidance pors
1. In discussing this subject, the following facts of DONIC
operations should be kept in views
a.
DHIC prepares its own daily guidance papers, written
by a special staff which has at its disposal a European-wide news-
gathering apparatus.
b. State Department overnight policy guidances are regularly
delivered to TONIC on the day of issue.
2.
•
Ouidance papers from PY are dispatched as soon as they are
received. For instance, Special Guidance on Eacteriological Warfare,
dated August 7, 1952, and Weekly Propaganda Guddance No. 9, dated
August 8, 1952, were sent on August 11. ·
:
3. The value of PY guidance papers for FMMC was´ taken up
with TOMIC officials last May, Their observations are contained in
the following quotations from their letters to this Division:
Q.
The Chief Programming Official wrote:
"We have received several of these papers in the past
couple of months. They are extremely useful for tho
following reasons:
:
a. They set forth clearly U. 3. policy on one issue
or another;
b. They occasionally report thinking in quarters from
which we hear nothing directly;
0.
They usually contain pertinent quotations of expres-
alon of views by the enemy which we can make use of
(both published and other sources, such as interroga-
tories)s.
BECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_73.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
SECRET
Tov mit on to
being.
fald down for propaganda addressed to other
audiences than ours (other than central and
saster Furope).
"n the sther hand, when these pavern dept of th our
targeter, they sometime real a herediverna from
our thinking and our points of view. Were tids is
owing to the hot that then have in mind black, while
we deal in white. the difference can be legitimato.
even so, wo find proposals that seem to us illogical,
and now and then extremely unwise.
thit
b.
The President of the organisation wrotes
"You anclosed a paper giving additional guidance matorial
for propaganda countoring Communist BW charges. All the
lines therein suggested have been mocessively used by us
since February 25 or thereabouts when the topic first
aross.
*Papers of this kind are of great uso, provided they arrive
promptly. By promptly is meant, either in anticipation of
an event, or an expression of views on the day the event
occurs."
The Deputy Director, Radio, wroter
mith regard to the paper (Prop-103, dated 23 March 1952)
that you enclosed, I checked Bob's department and they
advise that from the beginning wo have made the points
specified in 6(a) 3. and 5, 6(b)2, 9(a)1 and 2, 9(d), 9(ė), 10.
"As a matter of information, to our particular audiences wo
may, instead of 6(b)l, that the Soviet Union is trying to
persuade the leaders of German heavy industry, militarists,
and ex-Nazis to go into partnership with it; and instead of
(((c) that the prohibition of alliances is fraudulent, MosOON
intending, as in August 1939, to ally itself with a reaction-
ary Germany against our peoples. Again to our audiences, wo
sar instead of 9(a)2 that the German problem can be solved,
and that the Western powers are attempting to solve it in
the interest of the security of our audiences. We are glad
to see that our line parallels that laid down in 9(d) and (0)."
4. A fair summary of the use of FY guidance papers for RFE is as
follows:
EGRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_74.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
:
!
a.
They are useful insofar as they contain ideas that have
not occurred to TONI C's own people or in reference to events that are
not a matter of public knowledge.
b. In most cases the guidance papers arrive so late that
TONIC is already engaged in treating the next stage in the development
of the propaganda theme suggested.
0.
As PY guidance papers, therefore, aro at the moment
another contribution to the thinking of TONIC officials, it is not
possible to point to specific uses of the material suggested.
8. To be most useful, propaganda guidance from PY should
treat the development of special themes that have a specific relation
to precise U. 3. Government operations and objectives aside from
general U. 3. foreign policy goals. To be most useful to RFE, such.
guidance should be developed over a period of time in anticipation
of the actual facts or operations making up such programs.
10/10: C:WPD.
FMMONS BROWN
Acting Chief
International Organizations Division
Orig
->>>
Addreasse
1 cc TO/TIFIC
1 cc
2 cc
->
-
CIO
PI
-
CRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_76.jpeg ---
14-00000
4. An organisational form of a large passive Council, to which all
Rumanians who meet certain qualifications could belong, but with all action
vested in a small Executive Committee, offers a practical way to satisfy
both U. E. and refugee requirements. The name of this overall organization
should be the "Rumanian National Committee" since this would provido a sUNDE
of contimity and would facilitate acceptance of the proposal by Vicolanu
and the King. It would be formed by an expansion of the present Rumanian
National Committed into the Executive Committee of approximately twenty
persons. Hembership in the Council would be extended to the runk and filo
by means of letters announcing the new organization and inviting participation.
The "Council" of the Rumanian National Committee would include members from
Radoscu should be designated
all countries and would not meet in session.
The Executivo Committee would be the
honorary president of the Council.
functional unit of the organization. It would appoint sub-commmmionions and
groups to perform the work of the Committee and designate representatives
of the Rumanian liational Committee at various refuges centers in Europe,
A membership card would be issued to
South America, and the Near East.
Members of cxtremist groups would bo
all who affiliate with the Council.
excluded in principle froin membership in the Rumanian National Committee,
except in certain cases passed upon by the Committoo and accepted by us.
A newspaper would be published and distributed in liberal quantities.
5. The Executive Committee headquarters would be in New York City
and work in conjunction with the NCFE and representatives of CIA. It is
recommended that the position of chairman of the Executive Committee be
held for a term of one year, elective by members of this committee only.
Ita members should bes
Constantin Visolanu, Chairman
Gheorghe Assan
Cornel Manu
Vintila Bratianu
Nicolao Caranfil
Edmond Ciuntu
Brutus Costo
Alexandru Crotaianu
Anton Crihan
Carlos Davila
Mihail Farcasanu
Grigore Gafençu
Emil Chilezən
Mircea lorgnitiu
Augustin Popa
Iancu Zisou
- 2

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_78.jpeg ---
14-00000.
SECRET
Security Information
11 September 1952.
:
i
the Record
MEMORANDUM FOR: _ DEPUTY DIRECTOR
SUBJECT:
Conversation with Admiral H. B. Miller on Wednesday,
the 10th of September.
The following is a memorandum of my conversation with
Admiral Miller in low York on Wednesday, September 10th. I would
like to proface this account with the observation that Admiral Hiller
seems to be in a highly emotional state and generally suspicious, of
those around him.
(1) Larry deleuſville
Admiral Hiller reported his meetings with Larry doNeuville
in Paris and indicated a difference in his projected use of Larry
deNeuſville and that onvisaged by de Neufville, which Admiral Miller
presumed represented CIA's interests. Hiller proposes to use
deNeufville as one of a three man brain trust, one of whom is Louis
Gallantier and the other is still unnamed. Ho mentioned that he had
originally considered delicufville as an aide in administrative matters
but had been informed that doNeufville was not equipped for such duties.
(2) VOA
Admiral Hiller indicated that RFE was having difficulties with
VOA, especially with the new Information Intelligence Unit created by
the State Department, under the direction of Donald Shea, to provide
information for VOA's broadcasts to the Iron Curtain countries. Those
difficulties included the preventing of RE's information people from
interviewing oscapees.
(3) Information Service
Leland Stowe
Admiral Miller indicated that he was more than satisfied with
Laland Stowe's activities, and that with the exception of RFE corres-
pondents in London and Paris, they were satisfied with present personnel.
He also stated that Russell Hill had become RFE correspondent in Germany.
He further indicated that he will make every effort to keep Leland Stowe
on after the expiration of the present aix-month consultative contract.
✓ SECRET
Security Intermen

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_79.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET
Security Information
2
(4) Father Horlion
Admiral Hiller stated that he had conferences with Monsignor
Cardini who stated that Father Morlion's information was not reliable.
Admiral Miller reported that McDonald, the RFE correspondent in Rome,
held the same view. Admiral Miller exhibited some suspicion of the
actions of Mr. Delbeare in trying to sell him the matter of Father
Horlion and Anna Brady, but stated if that was what Mr. Dulles wanted,
that was all right with him.
(5) Crusade for Freedom
:
Admiral Miller indicated he was going to give two days a
week to the Crusade for Freedom.
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
Acting Chief,
International Organizations Division
AC/IC:WPD/cmm
Distribution:
Orig Addressee (via C/FP, and DD/P)
1 cc
1 cc
2 cc
-
->>
-
-
CIO
IO/Tonic
RI
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_77.jpeg ---
14-00000
3.
t
6. As the first step in achieving the organization outlined Above,
it is suggested that the NCPE reply to Visoianu's memo expressing appre-
At this meeting,
ciation and inviting him to a discussion of his proposal.
the NCFE should present the ideas outlined in paragraph has the American
view of the compromise which, after careful study, appears to offer the
best possible solution. In the discussion, the NCFE should indicate that
this plan is the result of much thought by interested groups after dis-
cussions with many refugees, that it has attempted to aid the refurees
because of its interest in them and their country's welfare, and that it
is prepared to support a Rusanian refugee organization in a number of
NEVS. Visolanu should be invited to recommand the people whom he considers
He will have been briefed by CIA
desirable for the Executive Committes.
prior to the meeting and will propose the same list generally as that in
paragraph 5. The NCFE should then request Visoianu's cooperation and active
participation in forming an organization along the lines suggested in para-
graphs 4 and 5. It will suggest that Vicoianu, Fore and Crihan work with
Cafencu, Chilezan and Conto for this purpose. Each of these gentlemon should
be approached by CIA and NCFE prior to the opening contact meeting of the
group. If any substitutions are made in the participants, CIA should be
consulted prior to the time arrangements are completed. After this group
has worked cut details of the organization and consulted with the others
suggested for the Executive Committee, the HCFE will issue invitations to
a general meeting of this Committee and will ancist in getting the other
organisational details underway. Sub-commissions should be catablished.
immediately, using the refugees who have been participating in the recent
NCFE discussions. Arrangements will be made for Visoianu and Gafenou and
an additional delegation to be named later, to co to England to inform the
King of the agreements reached and the details of the new organization.
•
7. During this phase of activity, it is recommended that someone
from this Division be assigned on TDY in New York to work closely with the
NCFE and advise on any necessary changes. CIA will contact certain refugees
to ensure their cooperation prior to the initiation of this phase of activ-
ity.
It
8. This plan has been coordinated with the Department of State.
is requested that the details be forwarded to the HCFE and a meeting arranged
to discuss the implementation.
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE
☑*

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
word
15 December 1952
Dear Archie:
I much enjoyed our chance for a talk, and Bill Durkee,
who assists me in the subject we discussed, is tremendously
enthusiastic, as I am, about the possibility that you will
consider favorably the appointment Frank mentioned.
Let me state again what seems to me most important in
the facts under discussion. The Job is of national and
world-wide importance. It can help achieve greatness. It
can endanger us all. It requires a man of imagination and
ideas but also a man of deep and thoughtful responsibility
to discharge it well.
I should like you to consider that I am at your service
at any time to give you any facts you would like to have ar
any opinions for that matter. All of us here consider that
we would be greatly privileged to be able to help you if you
undertook the job.
. Archibald Alexander
1430 - 33rd Street, N. W.
Washington, D. C.
Sincerely,
Thomas W. Braden

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_75.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
12 September 1952
T
:
[
MEMORAN LAIM FORT
Chief, 10 Division
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Current U. B. Attempt to form a Unified Rumanian
Refugoo Organization
Manorandum to Chief, IO Division, Subjects
Subject: SE Division
Plan for Rimanian Exigre Organization, dated 28 May 1952
1. In view of the considerable length of time since RCFE opened
negotiations for Humanian refugco unity and subsequent developments, a
reappraisal of the nituation and a delineation of final action are required.
2. It is evident that expression of NCFE interest in the Council of
Folitical Parties (actually it has been directed primarily toward the
National Fondant Farty) has had the desired effect on the two refugee groups
in the United States, by raising the specter of a third force developing
and being recommised by the Americans. It has also made the King mare of
the seriousness with which the Americans re,ard the division between tho
two groups. Further, it has incited the Iron Guard to adopt a "democratic"
facado in the hope, perhaps, of Pitting eventually into the resulting
organization. However, in spite of the success of the maneuver, further
encouragement of the COPP and the RF could well provo dangerous to our
overall objective of unifying the refugees, by adding fuel to their differ-
onces.
3. Caroful consideration has been given to the various worthwhile
proposals and counter proposals which were advanced in the course of the
recent discussions. It is hoped, in this connection, that the NCFE has
made it entirely clear to all the participants that this sories of dis-
cussions was undertaken purely to explore the possibilities for agreement
in concert with the refugees themselves, and that after hearing all sides
of the question, the NCPE will present for their consideration a "package"
proposal, on the basis of which final agreement should be reached. It is
believed that the revision of the original plan, set forth below and
embodying certain features which have developed in the course of the last
three months, can provide a solution acceptable both to this organization
and to the refugees. Operational considerations, the desirability of
maintaining a reasonable degree of control, the necessity for taking into
account the refugee concept of democratic procedures, as well as the firm
stand on size taken by the Rumanian National Committee, these are all
important factors affecting the problem. The final organization should
bo small enough to control, sufficiently selective to attract prominent
exiles, inclusive enough to contain the rank and file, and of an optimum
sise to carry out its functions effectively.
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_80.jpeg ---
14-00000
National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc.
110 WEST 97TH STREET
NEW YORK 19. N. Y.
HASPHONE PLAZA 7-7600
LABLE ADDEDENT NATERCOM
September
1952
Mr. Thomas Braden
2203 Foxhall Road, N. W.
Washington, D. C.
Dear Mr. Braden:
At the suggestion of Admiral Willer, I an
enclosing six copies of the new Committee brochure
"Weapon in the Struggle for Freedom."
like to have additional copies, please do not hesi-
tate to let me know.
If you would
Sincerely yours,
sswalke
Samuel S. Walker, Jr.
Director, Research and
Publications Service
SSW:bvb
"
:
i
.

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_82.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
CONFIDENTIAL
Security Information
ER-3-2387.
8 September 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director, Plano
Acting Chief, International Organisations
FROM
1 Deputy Director Central Intelligence
1. Mr. Phonix when he was recently here advised me that the
Board of NCFE desired to change its name from "National Committee
The purpos8
for a Free Europe, Lae." to "Free Europe Committee."
of this was to avoid confusion dth the multitude of "national
committees" for various purposes, some of them subversive.
2. This proposed change was discussed at the morning meeting
with the Director and Deputies and no objection was found if the
Committee really wanted to do it. I suggest that C/IO confirm
this to Phenix as they want to set the legal steps in motion.
+
;
ALLEN W. DULLES
CONFIDENTIAL
Sorway information
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_84.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECTET
Security Information
7 August 1952
TUB
MEMORANDUM FOR:
MR. THOMAS W. PRADEN
SUBJECT:
Chief, International Organizations Division
Request While on Travel Ordors
Please contact Larry d'Noufville to obtain debriefing
paper of Sperling and to be present at further verbal dobriofing
of Sperling. Sperling will be available in Paris from the 15th
of August to the 2nd of September.
:
Drood.
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
C/10/TONIC
SECTET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_83.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐
1
11 August 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
Admiral Miller Letter about MCFE Personnal
mentioned at the PRC Mooting on Friday, 8 August
1. Attached horoto in Admiral Hiller's anewer on behalf of
NOFE to mumerous requests for perionnel records of NCE in order
to provide CIA with basic information about this project.
2. In view of NCTE's reticence to provide us with such basic
information, Mr. Bradon and I have discussed the possibility of
whether we could effectively perform a liaison function here for
you without such information, and we are agreed that we cannot.
As you know, it is not our purpose to use this information to
harrass poople in New York or to quibble about salaries or detalla
of assignments. Wo do think that the only way I can porform its
responsibility toward NCFF is to keep itself fully informed in
every field of NCFE's activity, and that knowing which employeso
are doing what is essential information.
3. You suggested at the PEC meeting on & August that you
might be able to give us a hand in our effort to get this informa-
tion.
Attachmant
As stated.
17/TONIC WPD/oh
Orig
-
Addressee
1 co - CIO
200 - TONIC
22
200 - RI
:
SECRET
WILLIAM P. DURKEE
C/IC/TORIC
I
see pind for attacchiment
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_86.jpeg ---
14-00000
::
SECHEI
-2-
:
:
APPROVED PROGRAMS.
THE BULL-AUGUSTINE RECOMMENDATIONS SHOW THAT
A MORE EFFICIENT AND SOMEWHAT MORE COMPREHENSIVE OPERATION (FOR
EXAMPLE POLISH REFUGEES ARE NOW TO BE COVERED) WILL CL HPT COST
ABOUT $400,000 FOR THE TEN MONTHS-SEPTEMBER THROUGH JUNE, AN
INCREASE OF ONLY $100,000.
:
"THIS PROGRAM IS NOT A NEW ONE FOR NCFE AND IT INVOLVES NO
RESETTLEMENT HOUSING OR LARGE SCALE SUBSISTENCE EXPENDITURES.
DOES NOT CONFLICT WITH OR DUPLICATE ANYTHING THAT IS NOW BEING DONE
IT
.
i
BY RPT BY OFFICIAL UNITED STATES AGENCIES NOR DOES IT INVOLVE ANY
LONG-TERM COMMITMENTS. IT REPRESENTS AN EFFORT TO DEMONSTRATE THAT
NCFE REALLY IS CONCERNED WITH THE MORALE OF REFUGEES REACHING WESTERN
WE SEE NO REASON, THEREFORE,
EUROPE FROM THE IRON CURTAIN COUNTRIES.
WHY THE STATE DEPARTMENT OR ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT NEED BE
I
I
CONSULTED AT THIS TIME.
"
PLEASE DISCUSS WITH MR. DULLES KIT DULLES.
GR-351
:
;
SECRET
::

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_81.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
ļ
:
1
:
SECRET
Security Information
MEIORAHANK FOR THE TURCOKO
2 September 1952
SUBJECT: Keeting on Security Procedures in the FEUE
Those present: Captain Sabolov, Dr. Tyson, Thomas
Heyers, Francis Hand, Dob Cunningham,
John Runney
1. The purpose of this meeting was to inform the Office of
Inspection and Security of the security arrangements made in the
selection of students for the Free University in Exile.
2.
As a result of the discussions, an outline by Captain.
Sabalow of his security procedures, it was agreed:
3.
8.. That the present security practices were satisfactory
and that the nature of the security problem does not call
for the kind of security scrutiny necessary in Radio Free
Europe.
b. That the FEUE is an excellent source of information for
CIA and that in consequence Captain Sabalov will make
available to this Agency:
(1) A list of all applicants to the Free University
with biographical data.
2)
A list of all student with biographical data given
general scholorship aid in Europe.
That no contacts by CIA with the Free University in Exile will
be undertaken except by headquarters action or by field stations through
Mr. Royal Tyler.
William P. Dub
WILLIAM P. DURKNE
IO/TONIC
SECRET
Security Information
F

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_85.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
PRIORITY SECRET TO WASHINGTON FROM NEW YORK
6 Aug 52
9
TO REEVES FOR THOMAS BRADEN FROM LFA--SECURITY INFORMATION --CITE
NY -3124
!
:
:
JOHN C. HUGHES RPT JOHN C. HUGHES SAYS:
"THE BULL-AUGUSTINE REPORT OP JULY 20 WAD PREPARED IN PARIS AND
DISTRIBUTED BY ROYALL TYLER FROM THERE. HAMEDIATELY ON READING IT
CURATEL
I PROPOSED A MODIFICATION OF THE HAME FOR THE PROPOSED OPERATION SO
AS TO DEFINE MORE ACCURATELY 113 PURPOSE, I SUGGESTED WE CALL THE
PROJECT FREE EUROPE EXILE CENTERS, AND THIS HAME WAS ACCEPTED.
"IT MUST BE BORNE IN MIND THAT EVER SINCE NCFE HAS BEEN IN ACTIVE
OPERATION, INCREASING ATTENTION HAD BEEN PAID BY US TO THE PROBLEM
OF THOSE REFUGEES IN WESTERN EUROPE WHO ARE NATIONALS OF THE COUNTRIES
WITH WHICH CPE IS CONCERNED, AND SUBSTANTIAL SUMS HAVE BEEN PLACED
CED
IN THE HANDS OF THOSE NATIONAL COUNCILS WHICH SHOWED INITIATIVE IN
THIS PARTICULAR FIELD TO ENABLE THEM TO BUILD UP THE MORALE OF
THEIR HOMELESS NATIONALS. THE PRESENT REPORT AND ITS PROPOSALS
LOCK TO A MORE EFFICIENT PERFORMANCE ON A SOMEWHAT LARGER SCALE OF
WHAT IS ALREADY BEING DONE. TO ACCOMPLISH THIS RESULT, WE RECOMMEND
EMPLOYING A SMALL AMERICAN STAFF (OF ABOUT EIGHT PEOPLE) TO SUPERVISE
AND CONTROL THE ENTIRE OPERATIOH.
THE NCFE BUDGET FOR 1952-53 POR ACRK OF THIS CHARACTER INCLUDED
APPROXIMTELY RPT APPROXIMATELY $300,000 TO CONTINUE PREVIOUSLY
12118,000
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_87.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
5 August 1952
MEXHORANDUM FOR:
CHIEF, IO
SUBJECT:
Project TITONIC
-
Budget FY 1953
1. Returned herewith as requested ar the budget data for the
fiscal year 1953 received by Chi in the late afternoon of 2 August 1952
for review, evaluation and specific comment.
2. Only a cursory examination of such data is possible within
the time presently available. While from the information submitted
it does not appear that any of the estimates shown are greatly out
of line, it must be pointed out that C34 does not feel that it is
in a position to intelligently evaluate the proposed budget with respect
to the program and operational purposes contained therein.
3. It is folt desirable, howover, that sufficient detailed
information pertinent to the organizational and management features
of the project should be made available to CM to permit a review and
examination of those aspects in conjunction with the related proposed
budget provisions.
CH/HLS/Th
Distribution:
Orig. & 1
-
Addressce
3 - CM
2 - RI/FI
PRESTON L. SUTPHEN
Chief, Commercial Division
SECRET
Security Information
1
i
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_88.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1.
SECRET
Security Information
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, IO
SUBJECT:
5 August 1952
Project TPTONIC
Budget FY 1953
1. Returned herewith as requested ar the budget data for the
fiscal y. ar 1953 received by CM in the late afternoon of 2 August 1952
for review, evaluation and specific comment.
2. Only a cursory examination of such data is possible within
the time presently available. While from the information mibnitted
it does not appear that any of the estimates shown are greatly out
of line, it must be pointed out that C does not feel that it is
in a position to intelligently evaluate the proposed budget with respect
to the program and operational purposes contained therein.
3. It is folt desirable, howover, that sufficient detailed
information pertinent to the organizational and management features
of the project should be made available to CM to permit a review and
examination of those aspects in conjunction with the related proposed
budget provisions.
C/HLS/Th
Distribution:
Orig. & 1 - Addressce
3 - CM
2
-
RI/FI
+
PRESTON L. SUTPHEN
Chief, Commercial Division
SEGRET
Security Information
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_89.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
'
=
SECRET
Security Information
TONIC
August 5,1952
Dear Dicks
Tom Braden, one of our friends will be coming
over in your direction seon.
Pleano show him every courtesy and everything
that wo have in the way of operations. It is essen-
tial that he know our operations thoroughly, and all
Wrepo are off.
Kr. Richard J. Conden
Radio Free Europo
APC 407-A
c/o Postmaster
New York, New York
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
Sincerely youra,
H. R. Miller
ce: Royall Tyler - Paris
George Caesar - Lisbon
CC:
CC:
Oliver Hadwood
635-10
AUG 6 1952
SECRET
Security Information
i

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_92.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
;
1
:
SECPET
- 3 - Security
not have knowledge of the Sponsor-Fund relationship, the Fund
will, nevertheless, obtain appropriate security clearances from
the Sponsor prior to employment.
2.
Where appropriate, detailed procedures will be cooperatively
developed by the Furd and the Sponsor to insure the offective implementation
of the principles outlined in this Memorandum of Understanding,
For that purpose a liaison office in Sponsor's organization will
he designated by Sponsor. Except on financial and budget matters which
will be handled by the Fund with Sponsor's Office of Administration, and
on matters which the Fund desires to take up with the Director of Sponzor
or his immediato Deputies, relations between the Fund and Sponsor will
be coordinated by or through this liaison office and, except as above,
any matters which the fund desires to bring to the attention of Sponeor
may be referred to or through such liaison office.
Initialed as of this 4th day of August 1952:
/8/ A.W.D.
/ɛ/ H.H.M.
(Mr. Dulles)'
(Admiral Miller)
Secur
SECRET
Man
L
:
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a ling should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
bafore further routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
C/ID
NO.
3-5308
DATK
11 December 1952
PL
10.
12.
t.
DDCI
TO
2.
J.
eio
DURKee
5.
Chefor file
7.
*..
ROOM
NO.
DATE
HEC'D
OFFICER'S
INITIALS,
12/11
(
Braden
The
WPD
COMMENTS
EYES ONLY
Un Braden
How much more
does he want?
deat we
Lee
Jagie
Should do everytter
possible to get a
shid accounting
This isa serines
Malle
13,
14
15.
61155-1
U. S. RENT PING OFFICE
FORM NO. 51-10
SECRET
FEB 1950

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_93.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
GNCLASSIFIED PESTRICTED
CONTINENTIAL
SECRET
ESENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICAT
ND BOTTOM)
10
-
CPP
2
2
DD/P
3
DDCI
$
FROK
1
C/IO
2
3
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
INITIALS DATE
INITIALS DATE
TWB
8 Dec
APPROVAL
☐ ACTION
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
REMARKS:
0000
INFORMATION
DIRECT REPLY
☐ ☐
SIGNATURE
RETURN
DISPATCH
PREPARATION OF REPLY
FILE
RECOMMENDATION
This may interest you as evidence of the
good team spirit we have among some of our operating
campaigners. It was left behind by Alan Valentine
in his personal files.
Your Bunden
TWE
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
ENTIAL
RESTRICTED
30
SEP 1947
UNCLASSIFIED
2

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_90.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
P
Y
SECRET
Security Information
4 August 1952
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
R 3-1338(2)
1.
It is understood by Sponsor and the Fund that activities of the
Fund will be conducted in accordance with the following principles:
a. The fund will present to the Sponsor on or before 1 May
of each year a proposed program and financial budget for the
fiscal year beginning on 1 July. In general, this presentation
will include detail comparable to other Sponsor budget present-
ations and, of course, must include as a minimum sufficient
information to enable the Sponsor to analyze the program from
both a budgetary and policy viewpoint.
b. After subjecting the program and budget to normal Sponsor
review and analysis, the Sponsor will advise the Fund as to the
specific activities of the over-all program which the Sponsor
desires to support, and as to specific amounts approved for
expenditure in connection with each Fund division, including a
small General Administration Contingency Fund which can be used
at the discretion of the Fund for minor unforeseon requirements
of any division. Exceptions, limitations, or other special
provisions will bo stipulated where appropriate. The Fund will
undertake major activities other than those approved in its
annual program only when mutually agreed by the Sponsor and the
Fund. Transfer of funds from one Fund division to another division
will not be made except by prior mutual agreement of the Sponsor
and the Fund.
C. A reasonable reserve fund will be held by Sponsor and
provided for in the budget to take care of unforeseen emergencies
or contemplated activities which have not been sufficiently
developed to permit detailed budgetary planning. Releases will
be made from this fund to the Fund as appropriate upon present-
ation of proper justification to the Sponsor.
d. The Fund will furnish the Sponsor with such regular financial
reports reflecting its operations as may be necessary to enable the
Sponsor to properly account for the Fund exp. nditures. The Fund
will also furnish the Sponsor with copies of audit reports made to
the Fund by the firm of Certified Public Accountants employed for
that purpose by the Fund with the approval of the Sponsor.
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_91.jpeg ---
:
!
14-00000
:
i
-
SECRET
Security Information
0.. In order that the Fund may have available at all times
sufficient not liquid assets to provide for liabilities which
would exist in the event unforeseen liquidation became nocessary,
Sponsor will provide the Fund with an adequate liquidation
reserve which will be held by the Foundation and invested in
United States Government obligations of a readily convertible
varioty mutually agreed by Sponsor and the Pund. This reserve
will be made available to the fund no required, to be used only
for the purposes of liquidation as mutually agreed by Sponsor
and the Fund.
f.
In case of liquidation, the ascots of the Fund remaining
aftor payment and discharge of all debts and liabilities of the
corporation shall, as required by the Fund by-laws, be distributed
"to such tax-exempt charitable organizations as shall be
determined by the Board of Directore, in its discretion," but it
is understood that the Fund will, in fact, designate the tax-exempt
charitable corporation known as "The 1848 Foundation" as the
recipient of such net assets.
ɛ. The Sponsor will provide the Fund with appropriate guidance
and the Fund, to the extent it is apprised thereof, will insure that
all Fund activities are conducted in a manner consistent with U.S.
Government policy and the Sponsor policy and mission. It is more-
over recognized that developments unforeseen at the time of the
approval by the Sponsor of any annual program may require the
termination thereof, or any portions thereof, at any time by the
Fund either at its own instance or at the request of the Sponsor.
h. The Fund will accept restricted gifts from private donors, other
than Crusade for Freedom, inc., only when mutually agreed by the
Fund and the Sponsor.
1. The Fund may submit budgetary revisions either quarterly or
whenever proposed new activities or unforeseen developments require
a significant change in approved budgets.
j. Within the limits of approved budgets, the Fund will
requisition funds from the Sponsor quarterly unless unanticipated
requirements necessitate interim requisitions.
k. To promote their common security interest, the Sponsor will
keep the Fund continuously advised as to desirable security
procedures and the Fund will be free to request specific security
guidance from the Sponsor at any time. The Fund will not elect or ap-
point a director, officer, key executive or any other person who
will have knowledge of the Sponsor-Fund relationship without the prior
specific concurrence of the Sponsor. In respect of employees who will
SECRET
Security Information

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_95.jpeg ---
14-00000
SERUEL ORMATION
SEBUAH
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, IO Division
SUBJECT
List of Rightist Rumanian Refugees.
221;
1. In accordance with a request of Mr. John Teich for
information on any questionable mombors of Gen. Redescu'a
League of Free Rumanians, transmitted horewith is a list of
a number on whom information is availablo. Information on
others will be forwarded to you as received.
2. Most of those listed have been connected with the
Iron Guard groups, either as members or as follow travelers,
or with other groups whose ideology is in conflict with U. S.
policy. The names preceded by an antorisk are considered
unsuitable for employment in any American organization.
Encl.
List
SB/5/HC Hewsonic (13 August 1952)
JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE Division

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_94.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
1
:
:
1114
:
DDP 1610
PRIVATE 3
AND
2.
National Commigge Free Europe, Inc. 1/4
110 wast 37th STREET
CONFIDENTIAL
W YORK 19, N. Y.
TELEPHONE PLAZ 1.3608
+
ADD:
August 1, 1952
T
1
Mr. Alan Valenting, President
Committee for a Free Asia, Inc.
245 California Street
San Francisco, California
Dear Alan:
i
It was good to see you, if just for an instant,
in Washington.
For your private ear, I might tell you that we
won our battle hands down. Merely to confirm this, our
Executive Board is having lunch in Washington with Allen
and Bedell next Monday. This will be a general talk, but
I am sure that policies will come up for discussion.
Happily, everything seems to be sailing along in good
shape.
I checked down there regarding any taboo con-
cerning your help on the Crusade for Freedom campaign. I
think there was a misunderstanding here. They have no
thought of providing a complete taboo. Their thought was
that all other operation should not stop and your time be
devoted wholly to the Crusade.
Actually, we will call upon you for very little
help. When Dick Walsh comes out to talk with you within
the next ten days, he will give you a complete fill-in on
what assistance we would like to have. I am sure you will
have no trouble in giving us this assistance.
--
With regard to the wording of the language by
which we transmit the money to you I am going to try
to get a Board Meeting together on Tuesday at which time
the necessary action will be taken to clear our forward-
ing letters to you insofar as capital expenditures go.
My very best regards.
1
E
HBM: mlm
Sincerely,
Min
H. B. Miller
PRIVATË
AND
CONFIDENTIAL
T
.
i
WebLYSMEH___

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_96.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
i
i
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, EE Division
Chief, SE Division
Chief, Division
1 August 1952.
Chief, Fr. Division:
Chief, Budget and Analysis Division
Chief, Operations Division
SUBJECT:
TPTONIC Budget
1. Attached for your specific comments and evaluation
in the TITONIC proposed budget for Mocal year 1953.
2. It will be necessary to have your comments and
initials on the cover sheet by Tuesday noon, August 5.
!
THOMAS V. BRADEMA
Chief
International Organisations Division
1 E
I
1
1
1
1
222
-
ST
- 12
- PY
-
->
AL/BD
on/co
->>> CIO
-
10/TOMIC
2- RI
:
SECRET

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_99.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
i
¡
F
-3-
officials whose responsibilities are to lend their
coopération and guidance insofar as it is necessary to
achieve common objectives.
:
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
:

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_98.jpeg ---
14-00000
í
- 2 -
(3)
(3) NCFE has not only failed to provide information
about its activities, but had generally expanded
its relations with government agencies in an
effort to play one agency against another and,
indeed, in many cases play the personnel of one
agency against other personnel in that agency. A
general feeling of suspicion and distrust provaded
CIA's relationships with NCFE.
2. In an attempt to properly dischar
discharged its responsibilities
IO Division has attempted to solve the above problems by (8) preparing
an agreement or directive which xtates sets out the joint responsibilities
of CIA and NCFE and (E) which clearly states NCFE's duties and responsibilitis
to this Agency. To implement this agreement IO Division has, or is in the
process of, creating orderly procedures by which this agreement will be put
into effect.
3. If IO Division is to suceed in its task, which in our opinion
is well begun, two conditions are incour opinion essential:
:
(1) That there be a single point of liaison between NCFE
and CIA and that CIA act as the sole official governmental
liaison with NCFE. It should be said that this does not
mean that officials of NCFE will not consult with higher
authorities in CIA, but that when they do, those
:
responsible in IO Division will be fully informed.
(2) That NCFE clearly understands with whom they are to deal in
CIA and that those with whom they deal on a regular basis
are responsible officials entitled to respect as such-
;
:
1

--- Image 104-10225-10000_page_97.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
i
:
:
2
draft
July I not sent
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
NCFE CIA RELATIONS
1. When this Division was delegated the responsibility of
conducting CIA relations with NCFE it was immediately apparent that
a variety of problems existed which made effective action on the
part of IO Division difficult if not impossible. These difficulties
may be generally summarized as follows:
(1) Satisfactory mechanical procedures to provide
information to CIA and to insure effective
cooperation and coordination of activities by
CIA and NCFE did not exist. This was true not
only in financial matters, such as the orderly
submission of budgets and financial reporting,
as well as security, but was also true of attempts
to give NCFE policy guidance and to insure that
NCFE's activities did not compromise CIA
operational activities.
(2) The attitude of the responsible officials of NCFE
was one largely of non-cooperation in terms of NCFE
and CIA efforts being joint to achieve the same
objective. Indeed NCFE's attitude was that they are
a separate organization with the responsibilities
of a corporation in the State of New York and that
the role of CIA's representatives in dealing with
them was one of being their salesmen rather than
Keir
General activities were
approved and finances, their responsibilitic &
partners,
that once
fea...
CIA were buchelles