

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_1.jpeg ---
00000
104-10333-10014
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
REVIEW
RECORD
BOARD
June 9, 1997
Stewart F. Aly
Assassination Records Review Board
•
600 E Street NW 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 • Fax: (202) 724–0457
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT Colonel James R. Moore, Jr., U.S.A.
Associate Deputy General Counsel
Office of General Counsel
Department of Defense
1600 Defense Pentagon
Washington, DC 20301-1600
Re:
Information Management Officer,
DCSPER (DAPA-ZXI)
300 Army Pentagon, Room 2D749
Washington, DC 20310-0300
Proposal for a Multi-Agency Declassification Review of Joseph Califano's Army
Papers under the JFK Act
Gentlemen:
The Assassination Records Review Board would like to make arrangements with you to
declassify six boxes of Army records from the files of Joseph Califano. The files date.
principally from the period 1962-63, during which Mr. Califano served as Army General
Counsel and as Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Army. The records had been
deposited at the National Archives and Records Administration, where they were
recently located. A description of the records, which primarily pertain to U.S. activities
related to Cuba, is attached hereto. We have identified what appears to us to be
equities of numerous military entities in the Califano papers as well as equities of the
Central Intelligence Agency, the State Department, the United States Information
Agency, and others.
Deadlines
Due to the volume of the records, and the Review Board's current sunset date of
September 30, 1997, it is important that we proceed expeditiously in our review of the
records.' We have slated the Califano papers for review by the Board at its August 5–6, 1997
meeting. The Review Board staff is prepared to assist you in making arrangements for a
prompt and efficient review of the Califano papers.
JFK
ACT
ASE
RELE
'The Review Board is seeking from Congress a one-year, one-time extension to
September 30, 1998. Congressman Dan Burton is sponsoring a bill to extend the life of
the Review Board. Should the Review Board receive the proposed extension, we may
be able to revisit the schedule proposed below.
.
•
Board Members: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff - Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce - Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE Director: David G. Marwell

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_103.jpeg ---
13-00000
(3)` U. S. Military execution of specific counter-subversive tasks.
This involves action taken in response to specific needs, as
ear to Central America
during the 1962 attempts
These were countered, and probably shorted, by the presence of U.S. Navy
destruyers patrolling the coastal arena of Costa Rica at the request of the
warnment of that country.
(4) Overflight.
Although prim
designed toʻ
changes in Cuban military capabilities, these fights serva as a reminder of
U. 8. vigilance and determination.
(5) Communications Intelligence.
All of the above are supported by and given a sense of .
direction from the great volume of material provided through the facilities
of the Communications Intelligence system.
Propaganda « Radio and Television.
b. Propan
(1) The Vales of Ami no conducts 2-3/4 hours of short wave
broadcasts to Cuba daily. These serva, in some degree, to expose to the
Cuban people the subversive activities of the Castro regime.
(2) Armed Forces radio and television broadcasts from the Guantaname
Naval Base seek daily to combat the spread of Gozamunism by the orientation
of their programs.
I,'

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_10.jpeg ---
13-00000
SINA
TION
17:08 FAX 202 724 0457
ARRB
RECORDS
BOARD
MEMORANDUM.
Via Facsimile
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW - 2nd Floor-Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 ▪ Fax: (202) 724–0457
July 2, 1997
TO:
Mr. J. Barry Harrelson, Central Intelligence Agency HRG
FROM:
001
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
Doug Home, Assassination Records Review Board
SUBJECT: Declassification Session for Califano Papers and Joint Staff/JCS Records
1. The joint declassification session mentioned in our letters to the Army (re: the Joseph
Califano Papers) and to the Joint Secretariat (re: Selected Papers of JCS Chairmen
Lemnitzer, Taylor, and Wheeler, and selected JCS Central Files) of June 9, 1997 is
scheduled to take place during the four-day window Monday, July 21-Thursday, July
24, inclusive. The first session will commence at 9:00 A.M. Monday morning, July 21, at
the ARRB offices in room 207 of the Bicentennial Building, located at 600 E Street, NW
(at the corner of E Street NW and 6th Street).
2. Our offices are located equidistant from the following three Metro stations:
Archives/Navy Memorial (Yellow Line); Judiciary Square (Red Line); and Gallery Place
(Red Line). Parking Garages are located in the basement of the Bicentennial Building,
and also across the street from us in the basement of the ARRP building.
3. Please fax the names, SSNs, and clearance information for CIA attendees to Tracy
Shycoff on our staff at fax number (202) 724-0457 prior to close-of-business on
Wednesday, July 16, 1997. Please indicate on your visit request that the period of the
visit is through the end of calendar year 1997, since it is anticipated that our efforts to
expedite declassification of these documents will take more than one session to
accomplish.
4. We look forward to working cooperatively with all of our partners in this enterprise.
Board Members: John R. Tunheim, Chair • Henry F. Graff - Kermit L. Hall - William L. Joyce • Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: David G. Marwall

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_100.jpeg ---
13-00000
☐
"
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY.
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Helen
Thue a
lve
a lot of
Undated drafts
They
bese
are all abit
20-25 Fet.
Fil
Please do
the best you
can with their
*.1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_101.jpeg ---
13-00000
Mr Vance
COMBÁTTING COMMUNIST SUBVERSION IN LATIN AMERICA
1. Introduction
While
Fammunt
effort to
to export subversi
Latin America, from and through Cuba, there
is agreement, at the least, that the program embodies grave potential
hunards for the tranquility of the Hemisphere. Beyond this, there is also
general acknowledgement that the subversion problem is not a new one,
Maxded City have been
sources of infection to much of Latin America for two decades or more.
Finally, there is evidence that the U.S. appreciates those reálities, as
exhibited in the depth of an-going U.S. programs in all of Latin America,
aimed at blunting the Communist subversive thruste into the continent.
The question created by the President's underscoring of the problem is
whether or not our efforts in this area are adequate -- as to scope, as to
coordination, and as to intensity. It is the view of the Committee that they
are not. Further, it is the view of the Commlites that steps almed solely at
impeding the flow of students and subversives to and from Cuba will not, of
themselves, greatly abate the problem. There must be companion efforts
designed both to degrade the basic capability for Cuban-based subversion, as
well as efforts to develop a more effective resistance capacity among the
Latin American states. The sections to follow are designed with these two
requirements in mind.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_104.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
(3) Mit seq., (additions on this subject should be provided by USIA).
c. Intelligenza Collection.
(1) There is continuous intelligence collection on subversive
arkartą smployed in the Guantanamo
(should be supplied by CEA).
d.
ha Forum of World Opinion.
from Hamisphere organizations exhibitas
the pumity
the
ersive activity in har neighboring states
uval of Soviet combat forces
rametal
thay continue the pressure on the USSR, and
Cubans, and keep the subject of subversion before the world.
Current Politic
Usical Actions Aimed at Impeding Travel into and out of
Cubs
(This is to be provided by Stats)
2. Programe Which May ha Undestakon.
It is clear that those activities which relate to the denial of agent
sion në propaganda porva directly to diminish the
"
subvaselon from Cubs. It is necessary.
however, to contemplate other actions which, while lass directly related to
subversion, still surve to wanken Cuba and its Communist distatorship,
and thus to alluminate the problem at its source. It is for this reason that
there is presented herein a spectrum of actions related directly to Cuba.
While it is clear that some nations listed may exceed the horizons
čonsibility. In terms of
scope, vigor, or the requirements of international
relations, it is nevertheless.
necessary that they be set forth in

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_102.jpeg ---
13-00000
Seply
TOR SPODET
First, with respect to preventing the export of Communist subversion
by or through Cuba, there is a summary of what we are doing now, and what
do in the future.
lating
atin American nations to resist
the impact of Communist subversion, there is a summary of our current
programs and a listing of specific additional things which we can do; in other
words, a treatment of the subversive question from two points of view -.
therapy as regards Cubas prophylaxis as regards Latin America at large.
ist Subversion By and Through
Cuba
1. Programs Now in Motion.
The following existing programs are all having some adverse effect
on the basic capabilities of the Communists to organise, train, teach, equip,
underwrite and export subversive strength into Latin America from Cuba:
8. Reconnaissance and Surveillance activities, which unite to
provide information and to represent a continuing dațarsent to subversive
movements
(1) Picket ship patrol of the Windward Passage.
This action contributes to the restriction of illicit Cuban sea
traffic to Haiti and Dominican Republic area.
(2) Aircraft patrol flights out of Guantanamo.
These flights, augmenting surface surveillance, keep watch for
south
small-craft, fishing and merchant shipping operating in the Caribben
of Cuba, and waters adjacent to and north of Jamaica.
TOP SCORET
400+

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_107.jpeg ---
13-00000
ESECRET
(1) Attrit Cuban resources
defection of parse
Purchase
(b) Conduct
nduct non-s
↑ Cuba's
actions should
tend all the
porsamel, sirarafi,
▪attributable actions against petroleum
t'# stonomy depends. These
from direct destruction to sabotage
asid storage.
( intell
no indications (ircraft Nights,
agenta, clear sudio trajamisetum, boach Junqpers) enure Cuban military
forces to stand centima sily nú high alert level and thus to consumo suppiles
which could otherwise be dedicated to subversive training.
(2) Diminish Cuban financial resources.
(a) Consider introduction of counterfeit currency in
large quantities, to distort the Subun financial posture, and to
undermine confidence.
Russians.
on and dissension bet ween Cubans and
SELING I

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_11.jpeg ---
13-00000
Confidential
Memorandum For: David G Marwell
Subject:
18 July 1997
Executive Director
Assassination Records Review Board
CIA Reviewers
-
Clearance Certifications
1.
The CIA review team for the joint declassification
session for Califano Papers and Joint Staff/JCS records
scheduled for July 21-24 is composed of the following
individuals:
Charles A. Briggs
SSN 161-22-9115
IC/DCI/CSI/HRG
Kathleen Puchnick
SSN 161-26-1452
IC/DCI/CSI/HRG
Richard D. Kovar
IC/DCI/CSI/HRG
SSN 194-22-0138
Eileen M. Wukitch
SSN 178-36-7636
S/DO/IMS
Mary V. Amoia
SSN 579-42-8195
IC/DO/IMS
William Perkins
IC/DO/IMS.
SSN 082-30-4664
2. The Agency reviewers listed above have the
appropriate clearances to review Joseph Califano's Army
Papers and the selected JCS records and files. Official
certification of the individuals' clearances will follow.
If you have any questions concerning clearances in my
absence, please contact Barbara Standley, 703-613-1806
CL BY:
611637
X1
CL REASON:1.5(c)
DECL ON:
DRV FROM: COV 2-82
FAX:d by Barbara
AM- 21 July Sty
Confidential
J. Barry Harrelson
Project Officer,
CIA JFK Review

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_106.jpeg ---
13-00000
nationa
siin
Intensify Physical Intelligence Gathering Efforts.
(1) By non-attributable means -- Guhans and third country.
vor to acquire much more hard intelligenes on the nature
Haining conducted in Cul andmethods of exportation.
Movement of Persammel.
madtilateral and bilateral politient arrangements with
American statas, seek to impede the movement of persons into and
out of Culo. (This is to be expanded by State).
Train and Expert Subvezalvos.
and Economie Capability of Castro Cuba
It is evident that ready funds, in considerable quantity, are
required to conduct a subversive training program, not to speak of other
costly factors -- arms, demolitions, funt, food, propaganda, etc. Specific
actions aimed at seducing the Cuban's resources will thus have a direct
effect upon their ability to pursue their program of subversion, will cause
them to turn to thei
termņš problems and will give the Russians pauso
turn to their eta inter
igram which is costly and marginally
productive. Likewise, ovary action which contributes to instability, unrest,
apprehension and dissension between Russian and Cuban will reduce
correspondingly both their ability and their opportunity to drive forward on
a program of subversive training and exportation. The following actions
will contribute to this endi
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_109.jpeg ---
13-00000
---
SEGRET
(b) Officet exchange programs.
(c) Language training for Latin American military students.
(d) International Army, Navy and Air Force Defense Conferences.
(7) Troop information:
The United States military is embarked on a program aimed at ma
the Latin American military aware of the realities of Communism and
Communist subversion. This includes:
Translation into Ep
instation into Spanish And printing of 50,000 wata of the
"
series of ten pamphlets entitled, "Democrney varsus Communism. '
(b) Development of an audio/visual film strip based on the
"Democracy versus Communism pamphlets for the illiterate Latin American
enlisted men. One Hundred and eighty of these films and records have been
sent to GINGARIB for further distribution to the Latin American services.
{s} Thirteen-hundred copies of the USLA pamphlet "Tactices y
Directivas Contra La Tarsa Communista! are being procured for distribution
among the Latin American military.
b. The Politico-Economic Effort fto be supplied by State).
C.
The Propaganda Effort (to be supplied by USLA).
d. The Intelligence and Non-attributable Efforts(to be supplied by CIA).
2. Programs Which May Be Initiated;
As in the case of Section II, the programs outlined below are within
ence. However, as they cross the
reasonable technical and practicn!

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_108.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
Programs now in beings.
FOR SEBRET
raising the programs which are now in progress it is necessary
not yet anaclerated to
their full thrust and, taken all together, they have certainly not fortified
nur allies to tha ↑
• the point whera subversion can be said to be under full control.
US Military Niforte..
United States miliary forces are now participating in a broad
all of
which contribute to strengthening the shility of the countries to expose and put
down subversive activity. Of these, the principal ares
(1) Counterinsurgency, anti subversion and phychological operations
training through the medium of military missions and mobile training teams.
(2) Provision of equipment and material on short notice for uae
in the face of subversion or subversive threats.
(3) The conduct of emergency training programs in mob and rios
(4) Provision of fagmand counterinsurgency education for Latin
American ofãsers and enlisted men in United States Servies schools and
sendemics.
Am
(5) Provisian of civi e action training and assistance.
(6) Ancillary military efforts aimed at strengthening the ability
qountries to resist subversion): -
(a) United States provision of maintenance support and
assistance for Latin American naval and air units.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_105.jpeg ---
13-00000
J
their entirety, in order that
options.
a. Extend Surveillance of Cuba and the
(1) Intensively monitor, observe and
transportation -- both scheduled and nën-scheduled
Caribbean area
Communist.
providing
Iti-national politico-military program provi
cooperative Latin American state of suspected
Its territorial waters.
(2) · Exploit fully the intellige;
ystem passing through Havana, whil
of interrupting the system for security
b. Intensify Psychological Actichis
(1) Greate problems for thé C
programs by an intensified psychological
and airborne TV emphasizing the hardship
by the Campesinos while subversive traindes
(8) Publicise the contrast
instructors and those of the Cuban peši
(3) Increase greatly the amo
to Cuba, and intensify emphasis on the de
on the Cuban people by the Castro sub
(4) Conduct airborne televisión
people and Latin American students
astro-ssubversive efforts are
Hemisphere.
For SEGI

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_110.jpeg ---
13-00000
**
CRET
complete spectrum of actions, it is realized that some may be found
unsuitable, on political or other grounds:
(1) Establish & Caribbean sex and coastal surveillance program
which provides for multilateral exchange of information and multilateral
participation in an siesting systems each country to he responsible for
patrolling its own coast
(1) Requira a
aloru
system and provide selective exchange of intelligence between subscriber
nations.
(3) Continue the improvement of US communications in Latin
America, at high priority, to contribute to the effectiveness of the alørting.
system.
Fares.
Multinational Eminterinsurgency Fazan.
Explore the Konsibility of organising an GAS Counterinsurgency
Brigado for dominys
Latin Amarica to combat the effects of
subvoznjon. Buch reposal, made at this time, would exhibit the arious
determination of the U. §. to support vigorously an anti-subversion program.
c. Training and Orientation.
Provide for a greatly expanded out-of-country training and ·
orientation program for key segments of each Latin American country's
population much aas
7..

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_112.jpeg ---
82
13-00000
X'm
SECRET
(d) Facts on the decrease in living standards within Cuba since
the rise of Castro.
(a) Facts on terror and repression in Cuba.
Davalos
Many Latin American papara, ovan the anti-communist ones,
are infiltrated by communist agents and many of their calumniate, proof-
readers and Linotypare are bought with communist money. Circulation
of these papers is artificially inflated by low prices and underwkiṭṭan by
uznaniet. funds.
must match this financial investment
in news control in order to convey the truth to the Latin who, Hke the America:
believes what he reads.
(3) Distribute Anti-Communist Litorature
Books and pamphlets, in large numbers, exposing the reality.
of communism should be printëd in Spanish and Portuguese and distributed
through inexpensiva commerical sals,
í. Traval Controle (in ba furnished by State).
Improve Qur
marinsurgency Pe
We should accelerate and broaden counterinsurgency programs in
each country of Latin America, driving for a realistic "Internal Defense Flan"
for every country and urging Latin American countries to ask for US counter-
insurgency training assistance, for military, paramilitary and police forces,
Beyond this we should place specific emphasis upon developing civic action
programs in the areas of greatest need.
SE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_113.jpeg ---
13-00000
J. Non-attributable actions
SEOKE!
(1) Instigate and stage selected terrorist insidents in Latin
American countries, designed to implicate Castro.
(2) Arrange for eaches of Sevist
to be "discovered"
::
in selected Latin American countries, ostensibly smuggled in from Cuba.
IV. Conclusion.
It is the belief of the Committee that the actions outlined in the
preceding sections comprise a series of steps which in some arnas will stem
Ion in Latin
l'in others attack the program of
America. Each individual action embodies some element of usefulness in
itself, and any combination of actions may generate correspondingly favorable
results. There is no profound relationship which demands the combining of
any specific set of actions.
It is recommended, therefore, that an early selection be made of those
actions listed above whose execution is compatible with national obligations
and dedications in other areas and which are within U.S. capabilities, and
that they be put quickly into effect since the longer the subversive befluences
in the Hemisphere are permitted is mature, the more difficult will be their
ultimate elimination.
And finally, recognizing the diverse nature of the Cold War activities
involved, it is strongly recommended that a single point in the Government
be designated and assigned responsibility for supervising execution of the
total program.
TOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_115.jpeg ---
13-00000
HIGH SUVIT
BECRET
(2)
The designation of a single point in the Govern-
ment to be held responsible for supervising the execution of the total
program.
(3)
An intensified and broadened news and propaganda
program, including the following:
(a) Underwrite, as necessary, and conduct
an information program within each country in Latin America using
these themes:
1. An exposition of acts on subversive
training, movement of subversives and general subversive programs.
2. Objectives of the Communists within
each country.
3. Communist methods of operation.
4. Facts on the decrease in living standards
within Cuba since the rise of Castro.
5. Facts on terror and repression in Cuba.
(b) Develop a Pro-American Anti-Communist Press
Many Latin American papers, even the anti-
communist ones, are infiltrated by communist agents and many of their
columnists, proof-readers and linotypers are bought with communist
money. Circulation of these papers is artificially inflated by low prices
and underwritten by communist funds. The United States must match
this financial investment in news control in order to convey the truth
SECR

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_114.jpeg ---
13-00000
>j;
NF 13
;
A
TOP SECRET
While we generally concur with the paper prepared by the
Department of State, we do not believe that the proposals contained
therein present a sufficiently wide spectrum of options or activities
to impede and stop Castro/Communist subversion in Latin America.
Specifically, we recommend the following additional actions:
(1)
Measures to attrit Cuban resources:
(a) Purchase the defection of personnel,
aircraft, ships, boats and other valuable items.
(b) Conduct non-attributable actions against
petroleum resources, upon which much of Cuba's economy depends.
These actions should extend all the way from direct destruction to
sabotage through chemical and bacterial contamination of carriers
and storage.
(c) By means of intelligence indications (aircraft
flights, agents, clear radio transmission, beach jumpers) cause Cuban
military forces to stand continually at high alert level and thus to
consume supplies which could otherwise be dedicated to subversive
training.
(d) Consider introduction of counterfeit currency
in large quantities, to distort the Cuban financial posture, and to
undermine confidence.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_116.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
BT:
:
:
TOP SECA
to the Latin who, like the American, believes what he reads:
(c) Distribute Anti-Communist Literature
Books and pamphlets, in large numbers,
exposing the reality of communism should be printed in Spanish and
Portuguese and distributed through inexpensive commercial sale.
(4)
Greatly expanded training and orientation in the
United States for key segments of each Latin American country's
population, such as:
(a) Enlisted as well as officer military personnel
to be schooled in Panama and/or the United States.
or in the United States.
the United States.
United States.
(b) Police personnel to be schooled in Panama
(c) Newspaper personnel to be schooled within
(d) Nurses (male and female) to be trained in the
(e) Civilian technicians to be trained in United
States training schools.
The thrust of such an expanded training program,
taking place in the United States, is not just to enhance the skill and
education level of the people involved but, even more, to expose the
Latins to US influence, to show them our country, to persuade them by
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_111.jpeg ---
13-00000
_
Stovkusu
(1) Enlisted and officer military personnel to be schooled in
Panama and/or the United States.
(2) Polies
se personnel
be
schools..
(3) Newspaper personnal to be naksalad
chooled within the United States.
(4) Nurses fauale and female) to be trained in the United States.
(S) Civilian technicians to be trained in United States training
The thrust of su
taking pla
W
the United States, is not just to enhance the skill and education level of
people involved but, even more, to expose the Latine to US influence, to show
them our country, to persuade them by close association that our view i
corrent, and thus to stiffen their resolve to combat mubversion in any form,
d. Troop Information Program
Expand greatly the current Latin American troup information
program in order to educate the Latin American servicemont (and their
civilian contemporaries) to the mibversive danger they fac
e. ` News and Propaganda.
(1) Underwrite, as necessary, and condunt an information
program within each country in Latin America using these themees
(a) An exposition of facts on sulvarsive training, movement of
subversives and general subversivo programs,
(b). Objectives of the
(c) Communist methods of operation
SECRÉ!
country.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_117.jpeg ---
13-00000
Y
:
1
VATRUL DU JADRASAKAN
:
:
1.
POP SECRET
close association that our view is correct, and thus to stiffen their
resolve to combat subversion in any form.
4
TESE SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_118.jpeg ---
13-00000
. 1.
AN ACTION PROGRAM
COMBATTING COMMUNIST SUBVERSION IN LATIN AMERICA
Introduc
While there is not
is not total agreement on the magnitude
of the Odmist effort to
Americă,
rt subversion to Latin
and through Cuba, there is agreement, at the
mbodies grave potential hazards for
least, th At the pr
lity of the Hemispher Beyond this, there is
the tranquff
trái
also genami askmantledgement that the subversión problem
is not a new one, that the demanist bridgeheads in
Montevideo and Herise City have been sources of Infection
to mich of
America for decades or more.
Finally,
there is evidence that the U.S. appreciates these realities,
as exhibited in the depth of on-going U.S, programs in all
of Latin America, aimed at blunting the Communist subversive
thrusts into the continent.
The question created by the President's underscoring
of the problem is whether or not our efforts in this area
are adequatë as to scope, as to coordination, and as to
intensity.
is the view of this Committee that they are
not. Further, it is the
in the view of the
Lew of the Committee that steps
aimed solel at impeding
impeding the
of students and subversives
to and fromba 411 noti, themselves, greatly abate the
problem. where must be companion efforts designed both to
degrade the basic capability för Cuban-based subversion, as
well as eff
effective resistance
capacity among the Latin American states. The sections to
follow are designed with these two requirements in mind.
to develop a
First, with respect to preventing the export of Commu-
nist subveraton by or through Tuba, there is a summary of
what we are doing now, and what we can do in the future.
TOP SECRE
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_119.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Second, with respect to assisting the Latin American
nations to resist the impact or Communist subversion, there
is a summary of our current programs and a listing of
specific additional things which we can do; in other words,
a treatment of the subversive question from two points of
view therapy as regards Cuba, prophylaxis as regards Latin
America at large.
-
II. Measures to Impede the Frades of Communist Subversien
By and The
1. Prägrams Now in Nation.
The following existing programs are all having some
adverse effect on the basic angiabilities of the Commatists
to arganize, train, beach, equip, underwrite and expert
subversive strength into Latin Americh From Cubas
técommaissance and Burveillance activities, which
à
unite to provide information and to represent a continuing
to subversive movementt
(1)
Pieksh ship patral of the Windward Passage,
This action conta
ributes to the restriction
Ellicit duhan sea traffic to Haïti and Dominican
Republic area.
Aircraft patrol flights out of Guantanamo,
These flights, augmenting surface surveillance,
keep watch for smäll erüft, fishing and merchant
shipping 'operating in the Caribbean south of Cuba,
and waters adjacent to and north of Jamaica.
U.S, Military execution of specific counter-
subversive tasks,
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_120.jpeg ---
13-00000
CRET
This involves action taken in response to
specific needs, an during the 1962 attempts to expert
Cuban revolutionari
uries to Central America. These
countered, and probably aborted, by the presence
et U.S. Navy destres
patrolling the coastal areas
Cesta Rica at the request
request of the government
country.
(4) Overflight.
Although primarily designed to observe and
document alanges in Cuban military capabilit
ties.
these flights se
and determin
(5) Comma
reminder of 5.8. vigilance
doms Intelligence.
as
All of the above are supported by and given
sense of direction from the great volume of
Enterial provided through the facilities of the
mientions Intelligence system.
of
Propaganda – Radio and Television.
(1) The Voice of America nos conducts 2-3/4 houre
short-wave broadcasts to
broadensta to Guba dail
in some degree
En daily. These serve,
to the Cuban people the
subver activities of the Castro regine
(2) Armed Forous radio and television broadnants
the
Naval Base seek daily to
spread of Commmtem by the orientation
of their
(3) Et seq., (additions on this subjest shorÏÏ
provided by
Intelligence Collection.
(1) There
same collection
markers employed &
Quantanamo
Base.
(2) Et seq., (should be mypplied by CIA.)
3

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_12.jpeg ---
13-00000
1 08/05/87 TUE 17:24 FAX 202 724 0457
ARRB
TION
ASSASBIA
REVIT
RECORDS
BOARD
MEMORANDUM
Via Facsimile
August 5, 1997
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724–0088 • Fax: (202) 724-0457
•
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
TO:
Mr. J. Barry Harrelson, Central Intelligence Agency HRG
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Doug Horne, Assassination Records Review Board
I
Invitation to Next Declassification Session for Califano Papers and JCS
Records
1. I am writing to notify you that the next working session for joint declassification
review of subject records in accordance with the standards of the JFK Act is scheduled
for Tuesday, October 7 through Thursday, October 9, inclusive, in the ARRB conference
room in our second floor offices at 600 E Street, N.W.
2. Our goals for this second session are to complete joint review of the JCS papers, and
to open up for review two more boxes in the Califano collection. This session will also
allow selected agencies (which were not able to complete review of documents available
at the first session) an opportunity to catch up.
3. We see a need for representatives of the CIA to continue to attend these sessions
until they are completed.
4. Names and clearances need to be faxed to us only if the CIA attendees for this
October session are different from those clearances passed to ARRB in July. Our point-
of-contact and fax number for clearances is Tracy Shycoff, at (202) 724-0457.
5. For planning purposes, following this October session, our plans are to host one
session per month, of 2 to 3 days duration each time, until the declassification review of
the selected JCS papers and the Califano collection is completed. Agencies which
require more time are welcome to make individual appointments to review these
documents in-between the monthly, group sessions.
BOARD MEMBERS: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff • Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTON: David G. Marwell
1001
>

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_122.jpeg ---
13-00000
how?
(2) Consider, at a time when the criticality
situation dietates, re-instituting the
makine of Gaba giying as a reason evidence of
agenti and mate
entit and materiais of subversion
through Cuba.
Intensify Payshälegteal Actions.
(1) Create problem fes Cantro regima and
subversive
waive prejš
bự an intensified psycho-
Ingical effort mykánizing the hardships and
gü being endured by the Capeninos while
ed treatment.
subversive trainees are
(2) Publi
klons of USSI
contrast between living con-
rs and those of the Cuban
(3) Increase
the amount of VOA broad-
intly the amoRNS
ist time tailored to Cuba, und intensify emphasis
the
tegradation
suffering brought on the
Caban people by the Castro subversive effort.
television broadensts
(4) Candmat
Cuban
dwalling
people and Latin Am
Latin American students i
theme that Castro's subversiv
destroy the tranquility
Hazinghera,
Intranaify
Intelligence Gathering Efi
(1) Ey non-attributable means
-
Cubans and
avor toch move hard intelli-
the
nature and scope of subversive training
inducted in Cuba and methods of exportation.
Movement of Personnel.
Through multilateral and bilateral political
ngements with Latin American states, seek to
Impede the movement of persons into and out of Cuba,
(This to be expanded by State.)
5.
==

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_121.jpeg ---
13-00000
₫. The Forum of World Opinion.
(1) Elimination of Cuba from Hemisphere organi-
cations exhibits the penalty for conductive subversive
nativitiy in her neighboring states.
(2) U.S.-Sovjet talks regarding removal of Soviet
combat forces from Cuba are productive
productive in that they
continue the pressure on the USSR and the Cubans,
nd keep the subject of subversion before the world.
Current Political Actions Almed at Impeding Travel
and out
This to b
be provided by State)
It is clear that those notivities which relate
the dental of agent movement and the suppression of propa»
ganda seive directly to diminish the Commist capability
to export mibversion from Cuba. It is necessary, however,
to contemplate other actions which, while less directly
related to subversion, still serve to maken Cuba and its
Commist dictatorship, and them to eliminate the problem
at its smirce. It is for
It is for this reason that there is
presented herein á
á full spectrum of actions related directly
to Cuba. While it is clear that some actions listed may
exseed the horizons of feasibility, in terms of scope, vigor
ɔr the requirements of international relations, it is ne
theless ofnsidered necessary that they be set forth in their
entirety, in order that the President may contemplate
of options.
1-
never
Sufveillance of Cuba and the Caribbean.
musuely serve and report upon all fir and
transportati
ICH
both scheduled and
Free Horld and Comment
mmuntat in the One
la contiguous
Devalen an agreed alti
pioral
program providing
prę
tien by ench on
suspected
atipe Latin Ameri
territor

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_123.jpeg ---
13-00000
e. Diminish the Flynical and. Economic Capability
of Castro Cuba to Train and Export Subversives,
.
It is evident that ready funds, in considerable
quantity, are required to conduct a subversive training
not to speak of other costly facture - æ
olitions, fuel, food, propaganda, etc. Specific
tiene
can aimed at reduning the Cubans' resources will
tina have a direct effect upon their ability to pursua
program of subverton, will come them to tu
osta internal páýklèms and will give the Hungians
he wisdom of panning a program which is
ccatly and marginally productive. Likewise, every
to instability, unrest,
mrest, appre
dissension between Emsian and Cuban will
Branian
heir ability and their
program of subversive
on a prog
The following actions will
and ex
buta to
(1)
mmpicion in the Contro
(a) Introduse many
de many small inexpensive sabot
kita into the countr
gry
a small mumbais
they would wants valuable resor
resenfees, take Comm-
infat lives and divert
divert the attention of the regime
if utilised only
banta,
ta, in the aggr
regati
(b) Inte
Ingrensive
country.
dues very large numbers of small
Xa and ammunition into the
on would amme grave unrest
Russians, und
the Castre regime and among the Rapsia
would remit, inevitably, in costly search
tions
A
į

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_124.jpeg ---
13-00000
(2) Attrit Guhan resources.
(a) Purchase defection of personnel,
ift, ships, boats and other valuable items.
(b) Comfurti an-attributable actions against
petroleum resources, upon which much of Cuba's
economy dependa. These actions should extend all
the way from direct destruction to sabotage
through cherford mut bamburial
mal karterial contamination of
riers and st
planes specifi
Miable agente
beard jumping
(0) By mo
intelligence indications
omuse Cuban military forces to stand contimally
at high alert Ipvel und tins te connume supplice
which could otherwise be dedicated to subversive,
training.
(3) Diminish Cuban financial resources.
Conville
(a) Intance ✓ with Aterfeit currently in large
quantiti
to distort the Cuban Financial posture,
mind confidence.
(b) GASE
of bank
Caflumes
(4) Create suspicion and dissension betusen Cubans
Russiane.
Since the Russians are doubtless a unjer fästor
condunted in Cuba
with their inter rela
Will diminish
dininish dinën t
the subversive training caps
(a) Initia
Cuba am
itiate a Russian Language program beamed
denighed to attract Russian listen
an entiére
stablished, undertake to
question the purpose of, wisdom
and personnel Ek immoived by their pr
in Cuba..
T

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_125.jpeg ---
13-00000
*THI
(b) Exploit the presence of the Red Armý in
Cuba by driving a wedge between the Soviet soldier
instructers and the Cuban population. Efforts to
attain this chiotive would tholude the use of
live double agenta, planted rumors, incidents
created by guerrilla Insurgents, and propaganda
designed to identify the hardship of the peasant
with the Soviet Intrusion.
(c) Danglop artion'plans for Cabaus
barass and destory Russian technicians. Offer
dlandestine sources, for dentruction
Russian personnel.
Additional nations, gåsed directly at the
and distribution potential in
subversiyy
should be added by other agencies, in their
competence)
the Cerabil
Latin Am
2.
sten
cen to Resist Commizdat Subre:
nams in beings
praising the programs which are
which are now in progress
extensive though they are,
it is necessary to reflect
many have not yet accelerated to their full thrust and, taken
all together, they
they have certainly not fortified cur allies to
the point where subversion can be paid to be under full oøntrol.
US Military Efforts
United States military forces are now partici…
to
in a broad spectrum of military and extra-militar
notions in Latin America, all of which contribute
strengthening
thening the ability of the countries to exposa
these, the
put down subversive activity.
Insipal ares
i
..

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_126.jpeg ---
13-00000
SEGRE
(1) Commit
i-subversion and pay-
shological operations
na training, through the medium
na and mobile training teams.
military
(2) Frovision of equipment and material on short
stice for une
face of subversion or subversive
(S) The conduct
mob and rich control.
by training programs
ency
a counterinsur nay edu
(4) Provision of
tion for Latin American officers and enlisted men in
United States Service schools and sendentes.
(5) Provision of de notion training and
assistance.
(6) Ancillary military efforts aimed at strengthen-
ing the ability of Latin American countries to resist
subversions
supp
(a) United States provision of maintenance
and assistance for Latin American unral
and air units.
(b) Officer
(6) Language trad
for Latin Americar
ary student
(4) Inter
Navy and Air Force
Defense Conferences
(e) Cooperative mapping operations
Troop informati
The United States military is embarked on a
aimed at making the Latin American military
of the realities
Communism and Commanist
This insimis

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_129.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
d. Troop Information Fragrant
Expand grently the current Latin American troop
nformation program in order to educate the Latin bai
Amerion servicemen (and their afvilim contemperarten)
subvezuive gar they face.
Neum and Prop
(1) Underman
information
¨
urten using
using there tham
ery, and comet an
sach country in Latin
(a) în exposition of fasts
ing, movement
versive programs.
of feats on subversive te
versives, and general sub-.
(b) Objectives of the Communists within each
(0) Communist methods of operatio
(d) Facts on the decrease in living standarde
Gaba since the rise of Castro.
(e) Facts on terror and repression in Cuba.
(2) Develop a Pro-American Anti-Commamint Press
Mary Latin Auserious papers, even the anti-
sqmmmmmist ones, are infiltrated by communist agents
and many of their colmamists, proof-readers and
linotypers are bought with communist money. Circu-
Ístion of these papers is artifically inflated by Iow
prices and underwritten by communist funds. The
United States must match this financial investment
news control in order to convey the truth to the
Skin who like the American, believes what he reads,
(3) Distribute Anta Communist Literature
in large numbers,
should be printed in Spande
Fortuguese n distributed through inexpensive

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_13.jpeg ---
13-00000
A
TION
NATI
REVIEW
RECORDS
BOARD
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
NOVEMBER 18, 1997 ·
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW ⚫ 2nd Floor • Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724–0088 • Fax: (202) 724–0457
NEWS REelease
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
CONTACT: EILEEN SULLIVAN
(202) 724-0088, EXT. 253
JFK ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD RELEASES MILITARY
RECORDS RELATED TO U.S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA FROM 1962-64
The Assassination Records Review Board, an independent federal agency overseeing
the identification, review, and release of records related to the assassination of President
John F. Kennedy, today released approximately 1,500 pages of previously classified
military records from 1962-64 that relate to U.S. policy toward Cuba.
"These documents further expand the historical record by illustrating the United States
government's deep interest in developing a policy that would force Castro from power
during the early 1960's," said Dr. Anna Nelson, a member of the Review Board. "We
now have a new window into the policy options toward Cuba that were being
considered and debated at the highest levels of the military services."
The mandate of the Review Board is to make the record surrounding the assassination
of President Kennedy as complete as possible. The Board has aggressively sought to
uncover records on U.S. foreign policy that put the assassination into its historical
context.
The Review Board worked cooperatively with representatives from the Department of
Defense (DOD) and the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) to
locate records stored at NARA that met the definition of being "assassination related."
The documents are from the filed a pi Monho served as General Counsel to
the Secretary of the Army, the files of Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairmen Lemnitzer, Taylor
and Wheeler, and the central files of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The records have been transferred to NARA for inclusion in the JFK Collection, which is
housed at the NARA facility in College Park, Maryland. These documents are now
available to researchers.
Copies of selected documents are available from the Assassination Records Review
Board, 600 E Street, NW, Second Floor, Washington, DC 20530; telephone number: (202)
724-0088.
-more-
.
Board Members: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff • Kermit L. Hall • William L. Joyce • Anna K. Nelson
Executive Director: T. Jeremy Gunn • Deputy Director: Thomas E. Samoluk
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_128.jpeg ---
13-00000
CONCRET
1 (3) Contime the improvement of US
ommunications
in Latin America, at high priority, to contribute
effectiveness of the alerting system.
b. Multinational Counterinsurgancy Force.
the femalbility or
organizing
ing an OAS
Count
Latin Ameri
ey Brigade for employment throughout
to combat the effects of subversion.
Such a proposal, made at
sposal, made at this time, would
his time, would exhibit the
termination of the U.S. to support vigorously
an anti-subversion progr
raining and Orientat
Frovide for a greatly expanded out-of-country
and orientation p
mientation program for key segments of
each Latin American country's population such as ?
(1) Enlisted and officer military pernormal to be
sehzoled in Panama andễm the United States.
(2) Police persi
Staten
(3) Beursy
Sted
ed States.
to be scheeled in Far
be schooled within the
Imsan faale and female) to be trained
Ated State
in
(5) Myllian #eshsisiam to be trained in United
Spätes training schools.
The thrust of such
ng place in the
the skill and
hange the sk
but, even mons
to show them
sáng khác nh
expanded
mäed training program
States, is not just to
eduention level of the people immatred
the Latins to US influence,
to persunde them by close
is current, and this to stiffen
resolve to combat subversten in any fo
form.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_127.jpeg ---
13-00000
(a) Translation into Spanish and printing of
50,000 sets of the series of ten pamphlets
entitled, "Democracy versus Communism".
(b) Development of an audio/visual film strip
based on the "Democracy versus Communiem" pamphlets
for the illiterate Latin American enlisted men.
One-hundred and eighty of these films and records
have been sent GINTARIB For further distribution
to the Latin American services.
(c) Thirteen hundred copies of the USIA pamphlet
Tacklces y Directi
being procured
Latin American.
American military
Contra La Farsa Commentat
Estribution among the
The Politico-Koontzia Effort (to be supplied by
State).
The Frepaganin. Efført (to be supplied by USTA).
4. The Intelligence and Hon-attributable Efforts
(to be supplied by CIA),
ngramp Which May Be Initiated
2.
As in the ease of Section II, the pri
outlined
below are
However, al
is realized that etme may
easonable technical and practical competence.
cross the deplete spectrum of actiems, it
ummulțable, on political
or other grandas
B. Surveillances
(1) Establish a Caribbean sen and constal surveil
eral excher
which provides for multilateral
nformation and miltilateral partisipation in an
alerting systems sach
systems each country to be responsible for
its dim
nizy
Require a US
elligence input into the
Caribbean alerting system and provide for exchanging
gence between subscriber nations
SEGREP
< 13
A "

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_130.jpeg ---
13-00000
reariled
specific
Travel centrala
To a families by state
G
(1) We should strive for an QAS emb
on travel
to and m Gaba. If unable to achieve a majority
the CAS we should pursue the matter on a
decision
bilateral
teral banta, outside of the
inject these Cuba
the framework of the CAS
isplationist criteria inta.
acceptance requirements of the "Alliance for Progress
(2) We should induiste measures against Cuba
directed at preventing Latin Americans from entering
can
Cuba or returning to their own countries and prevent
Guban péèmannal and goods to other
the travel
American
n countr
should be used as a
The "Allismse for Pregresa!
lever
er, adding these requirements
the acceptability criteria.
(3) We should promote arrangements which pamit
pradition of indivi
who are zged with sub
8. Improve Our Counter murgency.
eney Programa
prog:
for
should accelerate and broaden counterinsurgency
in each country of Latin America, driving
realistic "Internal Defense Plan" for every
and urging Latin American countries to ask for US counter
assistance, for military, paramilita
and
se forces.
:
onsor Land and Political Reform
mity action
OAS channels
bring a
Americs in order
about land and political
to reduce the susceptibilities of the "have-nots" to
commmist subversion.
Labor and Youth Reforms
ge reforms to ameliorate the frustrations
and youth. With laber, it is
te
onomics; with yout it is a matter of orientation
°.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_131.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRE
Unless sufficient reform is made to satisfy the aspir-
ations of the laborer; and unless sufficient evidenes
is presented to embryonic intellectuals that Castrofam
in the greater of the political/ecomendo evils facing
me to find a fertile bed for
them
Castro will
him seeds.
.
utable subtons
Through third partie
seek and destroy the
agents,
sources, and subversive
wherever
Fenatra
1nt party lab
Labor and yonth
Amertean target countries.
Obdestiven would includes
(a) Publi
re of the apparatus,
(b) Frustre
subversive plans and ap-
by stramment authority
(a)
future subversiv
Instigate and stage selected terrorist
sidents Latin
an countries, designed to
Implicate ca
Castro.
(4) Arm
es of Sovie „Čzech arma
wared” in sele
ostensibly suggled in from Cuba.
lested Latin American countrie
14:124

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_132.jpeg ---
13-00000
and
which
IV. Conclusion
in turn crear alfatem
andin other
after the program
It is the conviction of the Committee that the actions
preceding mentions somprise a progpair which
outlingä
offers
“meeting me
may
generate
cess-of Gulin-based Communist subversion in Latin America.
Engh individual action embodies some element of usefulness
in itself, and any combination of actions
correspondingly favorable semits. There is no profound re-
lationship wh demands the combining of any specific set
of actions
It is ecommended, there
mended, therefore, that an early selection
ompatible
be made of these nations listed above whose execution is
national obligations and dedications in
other arem and that they be put quickly into effect since
the longer the subversive influences in the Hemisphere are
difficult will be their ulti-
permitted to maturë, the
mate elimination.
And finally, recognising the diverse nature of the
Cold War antivities involved, it is recommended that a
single point in the devezimmer
responsibility for
for gunça
designated and assigned
sing exe cutten of the total
grant.
mut imputat

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_133.jpeg ---
13-00000
Originating Agency:
Subject:
Date:
Contingency Plasaming
3/11/63
Other Agency Equities (check those that apply:)
DIA
Navy
ONI
OSD
Joint Staff
| ||
USAF
NSC
State Dept
__CIA
Other
(Please specify below)
CIA
The Department of State has no objection to the
release or declassification of this document in full
under the provisions of the JFK Assassination Record:
Collection Act of 1992 (PL102-526)
Reviewed on
7/21/27,

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_134.jpeg ---
13-00000
OSD/
ISA
440.
Captain Zumwalt/DRAFT # 2
March 11, 1963
IX.A.3.d. General Pressures to Create a Contingency
In order to accomplish the overthrow or reorientation of the Cuban
regime without harming the United States image and with minimum distortion
of bilateral US-USSR relationships, there must be careful coordination and
phasing of our future actions and demeanor. There must be a plan capable
of getting us from where we are now to where we want to go, by gradually
increasing pressures until the objective is achieved. These pressures
:
should be designed to create opportunities and contingency situations
for further exploitation, along the way.
The optimum orchestration of such a Cuban program must obviously be
developed as the future unfolds. But in order to provide overall guidance
within this Government, a plan tracing the mainstreams of effort is required.
This plan is divided into eight headings with a gradually increasing level
of effort described under each of these headings. The progress through
the various phases is visualized as taking place in a coordinated but not
necessarily symmetrical manner. In other words, we may be in the most
vigorous phase of propaganda while not yet having reached the final phase
with regard to subversion but nonetheless the decision to proceed to the
respective phase in either category would be coordinated as part of an
overall governmental orchestration.
A program scenario capable of producing a decisive change or
exploitable contingency over an 18-month period follows.
US Posture
-> -
Initially the US image should be that of willingness
to do all that is necessary to keep Castro's military threat nil and his
subversive threat to the Western Hemisphere at an acceptably low level.
It should be characterized as one during which the USG, having been.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_135.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
i
extremely reasonable despite Castro's intransigence, is waiting for signs
of more favorable change in Cuba.
Later the US image should change to one in which the US is being
"led" by the majority of the OAS into QAS initiated and sponsored
pressures against Cuba. These would consist of measures less than those
certain to overthrow Castro but going beyond the earlier measures, in
the expectation that resulting internal pressures might eliminate Castro
or provide an occasion for decisive action. Pressures would be applied
in such fashion as to represent both a carrot to the Cuban people to get
rid of Castro regime and a stick toward the present regime. Still later
the US stance should become publicly, "at last" to join the OAS majority
in seeking vigorous pressures on the Castro regime without yet irrevocably
committing US prestige to decisive action.
Finally, if and when the orchestration and circumstances have
brought the US position to such a point that decisive action is possible,
and if earlier pressures have not eliminated Castro or do not give promise
him,
of eliminating some decisive action might be considered. This need not
be an invasion by US forces and could be re-imposition of total blockade
or a disarming airstrike, dependent on the circumstances.
QAS Action The USG will need to devote major attention to the
strengthening of the solidarity of the OAS as a source of regional
opposition to the Castro regime. These efforts should go forward openly
along several lines, quite apart from the covert effort to organize the
majority on specific issues. This effort to achieve solidarity should
consist of frequent briefings of the OAS nations through all appropriate
channels, Consultative Meetings of Foreign Ministers of the QAS, efforts
to set up an OAS military organization with occasional commitment of troops
->>>
2.
-
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_136.jpeg ---
:
2
☐ th
13-00000
for training, and all other feasible developments of regional themes, such
as intensive efforts to build up the counterinsurgency capabilities of the
region. It is very necessary, in view of the general LA situation to
•
continue all measures necessary to isolate Castro.
Initial QAS action should be the enlargement of the bases for the
invocation of the Rio Treaty. This broadening should be against the con-
timed presence of Soviet troops (unless negotiations with the USSR indicate
that this aspect should be deferred) and/or against Castro's continued
subversive activity. Concomitantly, the recent study of the Special
Consultative Committee on Security should be given wide publicity and
the US should press for implementation of its recommendations,
The OAS, in the near future, probably after publication of the results
of the foregoing study and enlargement of the basis for invoking the Rio
Treaty to include subversion, should again formally warn Cuba against
promotion of any more subversive activities. The QAS should formally
state that should Cuban subversive activities rise above some (unspecified)
level, a "new condition" would exist which would justify decisive action
against Cuba. All episodes of subversion or sabotage which could be
attributed to Castro should be highly publicized. The majority OAS support
should be organized to neutralize the Brazilian co-existence theme.
Bilateral approaches and economic quid pro quos should be used to win
Brazil to the U.S. view within OAS.
Still later, at an appropriate time, the QAS should make an official
finding, from its studies initiated earlier, that the Castro regime has
continued, despite warnings, to conduct aggressive and subversive actions
in Latin America. A summary publication of subversive activities or
:
->

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_137.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
:
'White Paper should be promulgated through the QAS. Later a "new condition"
should be found formally to exist, following which the US would state
that the earlier US-USSR modus vivendi regarding Cuba has come to an end.
Following the above, an QAS vote should call for the remaining LA nations
to sever diplomatic relations with Cuba and for all members to restrict
their nationals from travel to Cuba. Castro should be officially labeled
as a major threat to the hemisphere and to the objective of the Alliance
for Progress.
The QAS might then declare that Castro's subversive activity constitutes
warlike activity and proclaim a prohibition against any warlike activity
being conducted by Cuba within an océan and land area around the entire LA
continental and Caribbean area. Intervention of aircraft and ships
carrying arms, subversive agents, propaganda materials, etc. could be
authorized.
ctivity
Still later at an appropriate time the QAS should vote, under the
Rio Pact, to punish Castro's aggression. This action could take the
form of a resolution for all members to take such action including the
use of force as individually considered appropriate or to endorse any
specific decisive action to which the members had agreed.
The USG should brief its Allies on the views of the OAS and warn that
the situation may get worse. Later, as a result of "QAS insistence" the
Free World should be urged to extend or re-affirm trade embargos to all
items except food stuffs, medicines, and medical supplies; to apply shipping
restrictions; NATO should be persuaded to include Cuba on the list of
countries to which shipment of COCOM list (strategic) items is prohibited;
free world industrial nations should be dissuaded from shipping to Cuba
T⠀
- 4 -

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_139.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
:
Regional Surveillance
--
The QAS or the Caribbean nations should take
the initiative in organizing, as a part of a Caribbean security arrange-
ment, a surface ship and aerial surveillance of the coastal and offshore
waters of the Caribbean nations. These patrols should be progressively
moved out from the shores of the nations being protected into the Caribbean
approaches to Cuba, tying in with an OAS proclaimed zone in which movement
of subversive agents, materials, forces, or arms is prohibited. Toward the
end of the crescendo, they should operate close to the shores of Cube.
There should be increasing surveillance and control of land boundaries.
There should be improved systematic exchange of intelligence on subversive
activity.
Propaganda
-->
There should be established immediately a radio station
(Radio Free Cuba), probably in Florida, using covert funds, with
regularly scheduled Cuban broadcasts available to all Cuban political
groups. Its content should be the middle converse between VOA and
Radio Swan.
Initially, through public statements, VOA, etc., maintain the
theme of the U.S. "watchful waiting" for change in the Castro regime.
Maintain the currently enhanced VOA wave facility beamed to Cuba. High-
light positive results in Latin America of the Alliance for Progress. We
should warn Cuba unofficially through the suggested Radio Free Cuba of the
consequences of continued subversion and of Castro's present track. Still
later, prior to any decisive action, if taken, this theme should go out
officially over VOA and in announcements of public officials.
:
Initiate and organize clandestine newspapers and leaflet operations.
Infiltrate Cuban exile publications. Play up, on all media, the threat
-:6
W

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_14.jpeg ---
13-00000
2
The Assassination Records Review Board was established by the JFK Act, which was
signed into law by President George Bush. The five members of the Board were
appointed by President Clinton, confirmed by the U.S. Senate, and sworn in on April
11, 1994. The law gives the Review Board the mandate and the authority to identify,
secure, and make available all records related to the assassination of President
Kennedy. It is the responsibility of the Board to determine which records are to be
made public immediately and which ones will have postponed release dates.
The Review Board consists of the following members:
Honorable John R. Tunheim, Chair; U.S. District Court Judge, District of Minnesota.
Dr. Henry F. Graff; Professor Emeritus of History at Columbia University.
Dr. Kermit L. Hall; Dean, College of Humanities, and Professor of History at The Ohio
State University.
Dr. William L. Joyce; Associate University Librarian for Rare Books and Special
Collections at Princeton University.
Dr. Anna K. Nelson; Distinguished Adjunct Historian in Residence at The American
University.
-30-
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_138.jpeg ---
13-00000
crucial
crucial spare parts and equipment which are not on the COCOM list.
Still later the US should increase the vigor with which she seeks,
through. briefings, pressures, etc., to increase the effectiveness of all
economic measures and should seek to persuade all non-bloc nations to
limit their airline services to Cuba and to withhold transit rights to
Soviet aircraft serving Cuba. At an appropriate point in the orchestration,
food stuffs should be added to the prohibited trade list, with US using.
its influence to extend this embargo throughout the Free World.
.
The ultimate extension of economic actions, would be the application
of a blockade to Cuba. This could be a phased weapon consisting of a,
blockade on POL, with the prospect of total blockade to follow.
Surveillance over Cuba
--
Until it becomes apparent that the Soviet
Union has no intention of removing any additional military personnel,
aerial surveillance should be limited to appropriate high altitude
coverage with low level surveillance avoided except for thoroughly
suspicious indications.
Later, at a suitable point in the orchestration, occasional low
altitude surveillance of "suspicious" areas should be undertaken in such
fashion as to be clearly visible to the Cuban people; while avoiding
AA defenses.
Still later, suitably timed, the United States/OAS should initiate
very frequent low altitude surveillance. This should be increased in
intensity to the point at which our aircraft would literally seek out
AA defense sites in search of provocative acts or, in the absence of
Cuban reaction, to deflate Castro's image.
In any decisive action at the end of the road, surveillance should
be at saturation levels.
-5-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_140.jpeg ---
13-00000
☑
of Castro to the regimes of the Western Hemisphere and the objectives
of Alliance for Progress. Remind the Cuban people that Castro came to
power on a pledge to provide political freedom. Remind them of the social
goals he held up while he destroyed that freedom. Contrast their present
economic chaos with those economic goals of land and housing reform..
Remind them that he preached nationalism while delivering their country
to the Soviet military occupation. Point out how each shift of goal was
accompanied by the destruction of earlier ones. Ask what Castro has left
to offer. Conclude that only the mitual fear of retribution among
his elite remains to hold them in power. Use slogans such as "L 64″
(Liberty in '64), etc.
Still later initiate through public broadcast, training in the
rudiments of seditions activity.
Still later urge the many small revolutionary-cells to make contact
with neighboring groups. Warn and threaten the Castro regime through
all media; exhort the people to organize to join enlarged resistance groups;
seek to build up resistance heroes. Endeavor to deflate Castro through
these broadcasts. Stress the freedom of the Cuban people, post-Castro, to
choose their own political and social structure.
Subversion
--
There should be an initial period of no increase in
subversive efforts by the U.S., until the bilateral phase of the Cuban
affair is completed and it is clear that the Soviet Union will remove
no additional military personnel.
After that time minimal covert contacts should be established within
Cuba for the distribution of newspapers and leaflets. Minimal acts of
defiance and sabotage should be initiated. For example, exhort groups
- 7 -
f

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_141.jpeg ---
13-00000
•
of 3 or 4 friends, without establishing external rebel affiliation, to
paint L'64, etc., on walls or to confit isolated acts of sabotage. The
purpose, would be to establish rebel connotation and to generate leadership.
This would lead to the establishment of rudimentary cellular training
in seditious activity. Minimal supply of critical items should be initiated
to subversive groups within Cuba on a case-by-case basis. Potential leaders
should be identified. Contingency planning, covert and unilateral, should
continue. The number of Cuban exiles taken into the United States Armed
Forces for training and formation of reserve units should be significantly
increased. A similar program for "freedom fighters for Cuba" should be
undertaken for volunteers from other LA nations. At a later point in the
crescendo, departures from the Cuban armed forces in organized units should
be encouraged. All covert effort should be exerted toward coordinating
the cells, pockets, and groups resisting Castro, inside and outside Cuba.
This would be a transition period from sporadic acts in isolation into
organized subversion. Fuel and food supplies should be sabotaged. An
organized supply system should be put into effect with large numbers of
fishing craft situated around the island to make both scheduled supply.
of deliveries and deliveries of opportunity. As various groups are identi-
fied in revolt, they should be worked into the supply system. New LA and
Cuban fighters training outside. Cuba, should be introduced in the same way
into these organized movements within Cuba. There should be frequent
leaks of planned US invasion and appropriate denials to frustrate the
suspicious Castro. Fleet and air "training" demonstrations should be
scheduled off Cuba. At the same time it should be made clear to rebel
leaders that an externally launched invasion is not to be expected until
a revolution has come from within, with external logistic assistance.
- 8 -

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_143.jpeg ---
13-00000
If Castro has initiated a suitable war-like act, such as fixing
on surveillance aircraft, pressures should be escalated to the maximum
immediately rather than gradually.
->
· 10
-
!

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_142.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
:
"
u.
It'
It should be emphasized to the retel leaders that the U.S. does not expect
the clock to be turned back with regard to social conditions.
Still later a complete orchestration should be woven together,
coming to a crescendo through the optimal exploitation of all the main-
stream:s discussed in the categories above. Propaganda should reach the
maximum denunciation of the regime, exhorting to revolt, holding up the
prospect of peace and a better life should the Cuban people join their
resistance leaders. Subversion should be stepped up by introduction of
all available externally trained resistance fighters, provision of maximum
logistic support, etc. At the appropriate time, if this resistance movement
needs the assistance of external forces there should be an OAS structured
air strike, related to an appropriate Castro mis-step, to disarm Cuban
offensive and defensive power and to destroy all POL storage. This attack
should be coordinated with all-out sabotage.
An invasion force should be kept in readiness for use, if re-
quired to save the resistance, once the all-out internal resistance
efforts has been initiated.
Criteria
--
The pressures discussed in all categories above should
be appropriately coordinated. The period of moderation should end after
one or two months when it is apparent that no further Soviet military
personnel are to be removed. Moderate pressures should then commence,
lasting for a period of two to three months, until some episode of
escalation by Castro or other appropriate event, makes further pressures
feasible. If such an event is not forthcoming, QAS major insistance should
lead to escalation of pressures. After another short period, again pre-
ferable triggered by an appropriate Castro episode or alternatively by a
majority QAS vote still more vigorous pressures should be initiated.
- 9 -

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_146.jpeg ---
13-00000
Top Secret
L.
M.
N.
SECRET
seek Mexican concurrence in using new equipment (IL-18)
on the Havana-Mexico City route. We should persuade
Mexico to refuse the new aircraft on grounds of safety,
facilities, or other reasons. We should also encourage
Great Britain or other sources to cut off spare parts
(unilateral U.S. action).
Encourage hemispheric countries to deny unscheduled
traffic stops to Cubana airlines (unilateral U.S. action).
Persuade friendly governments in LA and elsewhere to
harass ships and aircraft traveling to Cuba with admini- -
strative delays (minute examination of air worthiness
certificates, customs, documents, etc.) (unilateral U.S.
action).
Seek arrangement whereby other Latin American countries
would cooperate with Mexican efforts to deny travel their
nationals to and from Cuba via Mexico (see Mexico City
Tel 2221) (bilateral U.S. action).
2₁
SECRET
Secret

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_144.jpeg ---
13-00000
DEF
STATES OF Aural
Secret
SLORET
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
IN REPLY REFER TO
Op-613C/sg
Ser 000950P61
MAR 1 1963
Downgraded to CONF upon removal of enclosures
MEMORANDUM FOR MR. J..A. CALIFANO, SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE
SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
Subj:
Ref:
Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee on Cuban
Affairs: Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion (U)
(a) Your Memo No. 13 of 28 FEB 1963
Encl: (1) through (8) Proposed actions (TS)
1.
As requested by reference (a), specific and direct actions
designed to resolve problems of Cuban subversion are sub-
mitted herewith as enclosures (1) through (8).
Mile. Wench
W.FA WENDT
Director, Strategic Plans Divisio
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
PAGE NO 1 OF 1 PAGES
COPY NO. 1 OF 10 COPIES
Reproduction of this document in
whole or in part is prohibited
except with permissica of the
Issuing office or higher authority.
DELICI

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_145.jpeg ---
13-00000
Top Secret
“SECRET
A.
B.
PROPOSED ACTIONS WHICH MIGHT
BE TAKEN UNILATERALLY BY THE US,
BILATERALLY, OR THROUGH THE OAS, TO
IMPEDE THE MOVEMENT OF SUBVERSIVE
TRAINEES TO AND FROM CUBA
Institute effective procedures to insure that U.S. citizens
do not travel to and from Cuba (unilateral U.S. action).
Continue U.S. restriction against U.S. airline service
to Cuba. (This is important to avoid giving other air-
lines an excuse to reestablish air service) (unilateral
U.S. action).
C. Thoroughly examine Latin American constitutions and laws
to determine the legal capability or impediment to control
of travel of their citizens to and from Cuba (unilateral
U.S. action).
D.
Arrange for adverse publicity on individuals who are
known to have undergone subversive training in Cuba (uni-
lateral U.S. action).
E. Spread rumors of epidemics in Cuba (unilateral U.S. action).
Sabotage aircraft proceeding to and from Cuba (unilateral
U.S. action).
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
..K.
Increase U.S. efforts to establish identity of all Latin
Americans travelling to and from Cuba (unilateral U.S.
action).
Encourage Latin American countries to pass new legislation,
or enforce existing legislation, restricting the travel
of their citizens to and from Cuba (unilateral U.S. action).
Persuade Latin American governments to prevent re-entry.
to their country of persons suspected to have been
trained in subversion in Cuba (unilateral U.S. action).
Persuade LA countries to tighten border security measures
by appropriate authority (unilateral U.S. action). Supply
equipment and POL for patrol and surveillance. See
enclosure (6).
Cubana's Britannia aircraft are in disrepair (2 or 3 of 5
are operational). Under existing agreements, Cuba must
Reproduction of this document in
whole or in part is prohibited
except with permission of the
issuing office or higher authority,"
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
DOD DIR $200.10 DOES NOT APPLY,
ENCLOSURE (✓) to CNO Ser/Memo_000950861
"
SECRET
Secret

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_147.jpeg ---
13-00000
Sensitivé
SECRET
8. POLICY CONCERNIN
O
Col. J. K. Patchell
-
X75727
18 April 1963
ANDESTINE AND
COVERT ACTIONS DIRECTED AGAINST CUBA
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to provide, within security
limitations, a useful gulde for the consideration of clandestine
and covert actions as a part of a future projection of U. 6. action
rd Cubi
The paper is designed to be as objective as possible
compromising many details of highly sensitive information. For
this reason, the paper focusses on general principles. The study
is not intended to be critical. It is not designed to justify the past
nor to predict the future.
The discussion of the factors conditioning U. S. policy in
the realm of the clandestine and covert may seem elementary and
somewhat philosophical; however, these factors provide the general
parameters within which future actions can be considered. Any
attempt to determine the proportionate influence of any particular
conditioner would be speculative.
MAJOR CONDITIONING FACTORS
factors which
mber of the major conditioning
influenced past U. 8. policy in the
clandestine and covert areas. This is not an exhaustive list, but
it describes briefly a few of the elements which must be considered
in the process of making valid and conclusive determinations:
a. Obiective.
It is most desirable to determine the U. 8.
objective in precise terms. When the objective is clarified and
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADIN
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
SECRET
PIA

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_148.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRE
understood, actions can be developed to achieve that objective. The
extent of the U. S. commitment, as reflected by the determination
of the objective, is an important factor in the determination of the
commitment of U. S. resources and has great significance in the
motivation of recruit
It must be understood that the creation of a resistance
under the situation currently obtaining in Cuba probably envisages
an ultimate U. S. commitment to direct military action. There can
no advanced guarantee of the success or the security of auch an
ration, nor is there calistic brake upon the ultimate outcom
rapid escalation. Current intelligence
estimates indicate little likelihood of the success of a Guban ingjired
revolt without significant
which may be susceptible
nal support
ctions:
in support
5) overt U. 8. or multilateral actions,
there are general misconceptions and certain grave risks inherent
(a) seeking a solution to the Guba dilemma wholly by clandestine
covert méans, (b) placing disproportionate reliance on clandestine
covert activity, (c) developing clandestine or covert actions in
isolation of or significantly in advance of U. S. policy, and (d) develop-
ing actions for the sake of action alone or in order to capitalize on
some intriguing gimmickery.
Obviously, the determination of U. S. objectives is
beyond the realm of the clandestine and covert and cannot be con.
sidered in the context of Cuba alone. Serious judgments must be
made in relation to the broad world environment. Actions against
Cuba may be detrimental to U.-8. aims by causing intensified security
easures
Counteractions elsewhere, or the unnecessary
*US. suspects, potential age
C
gents
b. Riska.
A good "rule of thumb" with respect to clandestine
or covert actions is that the risks entailed are in direct proportion
to the usefulness of the operations.
ndestine
stine or
c.
Attribution and Deniability.
S. lendership will always be concerned with
etlona which
m
ibuted to the U. 8.
-
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_15.jpeg ---
13-00000
TION
REVIEW
RECORDS
BOARD
Assassination Records Review Board
•
600 E Street NW • 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 • Fax: (202) 724–0457
ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD RECORDS RELEASE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
NOVEMBER 18, 1997
4
CONTACT: EILEEN SULLIVAN
(202) 724-0088, EXT. 253
SELECTED DOCUMENTS FROM MILITARY RECORDS ON U.S. POLICY
TOWARD CUBA FROM 1962-64
Attached are six selected documents from approximately 1,500 pages of military
records that relate to U.S. policy toward Cuba from 1962-64. The records are being
released today by the Assassination Records Review Board. Sections of the documents
that may be of particular interest to the reader are marked by arrows in the margin on
the right side of the relevant pages.
List of Selected Documents
1. Excerpts from 198-10004-10020
Note: The Record Information Form (document cover sheet) for the compilation of
documents in this group is dated 3/1/63, but the excerpted documents are from
February 1962.
"Possible Actions To Provoke, Harass, Or Disrupt Cuba"
2. Excerpts from 202-10002-10104
February 7, 1962, March 9, 1962, March 12, 1962, March 13, 1962, April 10, 1962
"Northwoods" documents
3. Excerpts from 202-10002-10018
May 1, 1963
"Courses of Action Related to Cuba"
4. Excerpts from 198-10004-10011
December 11, 1963
Memo to Joseph Califano, General Counsel, Secretary of the Army - "Training of
Cuban Refugees in Nicaragua"
5. Excerpts from 202-10002-10010
December 19, 1963
"Meeting with President on Cuba"
.
Board Members: John R. Tunheim, Chair • Henry F. Graff • Kermit L. Hall • William L. Joyce • Anna K. Nelson
Executive Director: T. Jeremy Gunn • Deputy Director: Thomas E. Samoluk
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_149.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
It is reasonable to assume that Cuba will attribute to the U. 8.
(at the time of Cuba's choosing) any actions, real or manufactured,
which they desire. Assuming that the U. 8, will receive the blame
8.
Mexibility for action.
Deniability,
effort can be m
ised material,
ts, when carried
of the operation.. Ga
balance to achieve
In summ
while quite relevant, is a relative factor.
disassociate participants,
rate from covert bases
eme tend to jeopar
“made to strike
Anlability, term obvious
the determination of déniability i's
subjected to judgments at all levels of those who have acces
including the curious and sl
Involvements. Theoretically,
who develop personal emotion
the solution appears to be të Week
a reasonable balance betw Imost complete deniability (an
ixample in which few actions can be taken and the associated admin-
istrative or security precautions outweigh or jeopardize the opera»
tion itself) and reasonable safeguards to insure that the proof of
U. S. implication cannot be developed.
In this connection there is a mandatory requirement
for unanimity of denial on the part of U. S. officials. This unanimity
must obtain despite the magnitude, persistence, or accuracy of the
Castro/Communist propa
chine. The stated denials of U.
Official statements
fficials generally
Mi fan sion may
tred
promise othe
secure operation.
It should be pointed out that as a result of U.
accepted complicity in V-8 flights and the Bay of Pigs operation,
the U. S. is in a significantly more sensitive position with respet
to clandestine and covert actións. U. S. admissions tend to giv
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_151.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
There are obvious moral judgments attached to
many of the proposals for actions directed against Cuba. When
the judgments of various individuals differ, the resulting U. S. .
position probably reflects the least common denominator.. Many
proposals may be unacceptable because the deniability factor is
too low or the proposals may be of a nature that premature com-
mitment and subsequent disclosure would not be desirable since
the weapon may be worthy of a more far reaching impact. There
is an understandable frustration in the U. 8. resorting to the ap-
plication of sophisticated clandestine weapons against a small
state which theoretically could be brought to its knees in a rela«
tively short period of time through the application of conventional
weapons.
here is an imposing array of intriguing
amusing “tricks" which are of no real or lasting consequence.
These could subject the U. S. to adverse criticism on moral
grounds or extend the parameters of warfare to new dimensions.
4. Recruitment and Exile Politics.
The recruiting problem deserves consideration
in any paper considering clandestine and covert actions. Obviously,
the recruitment of a sole individual involves a system of screening
which theoretically must not be compromised either in the process
of sorting or during the subsequent utilization and post-utilization
periods. There is a marked tendency for Cubans to talk, to brag,
or to infer participation in secret operations. - Individuals personally
and scores of exile organizations are quick to capitalize on the real
or imaginary activities of their members. These Cuban exile organ-
isations compete for recognition, prestige and material support
which they hope will stem from their participation in clandestins or
covert activities. There is a constant flow of proposals for action
and requests for assistance or official recognition. Some individuals
and organizations merely desire to publicize their affiliations with
some member of the U. S. Government.
5
OP SECRET
"

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_150.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
TP SECRET
greater credibility to the accusations of the Castro or Sino/Soviet
Bloc and alert our enemies to the possibility that the U. S. may
undertake actions of a less conventional nature.
It may be desirable to undertake actions which
achieve Uttle press coverage (visibility or noise level). It is
difficult to determine with any accuracy beforehand the extent of
the publicity to be achieved. The Castro Regime generally can
control the timing and magnitude of public release. The world
press for the most part is not subject to U, S. control except as
the U. S. may achieve success through counter-propaganda.
è is reasonable to conclude that à progressive
increasing or static molde level is the most acceptable,
atically increased noise level may be acceptable when accompinied
by significant (headline) overt items which serve to distract the
attention of the public.
e. Morality and Selectivity.
There is a natural reluctance to undertake
clandestine or covert actions which result in the death or serious
injury to innocent Cubana. Meaningful actions will certainly
cause harm to certain elements, but some of the destructive actions
which could be undertaken may be counterproductive in that they
strike at the wrong targets. Unfortunately, it is difficult to achieve
the desired degree of selectivity in uncontrolled operations, imple-
mented in secrecy.
The creation of food, clothing and medical shortages
'and the sabotage of storage or distribution facilities undoubtedly may
hurt the economy but those committed to the Castro Regime may
suffer relatively little. Such actions may do little but weaken an
inactive or apathetic populace while increasing the internal security
mechanism.
IP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_152.jpeg ---
13-00000
.......
..
"
SECRET
:
It is not feasible to investigate in details all
of the proposals for action submitted by individuals and groups.
Experience has indicated that generally the exile claims are
without foundation and the preponderance of their proposals a se
not feasible. As a matter of practice such individuals or groups
are not satisfied with a single rebuff, but make their offers to in-
dividuals in CIA, the Departments of State, Defense and Justice
or with members, of Congress, the press, and other non-gover
mental individuals or agencies. A specific action or proposal
may have had merit at one point, but from a security standpoint,
the persistence of the proposer may have negated the potential
of his proposal and could have compromised an otherwise
workable scheme.
In order to minimize affiliation with
groups, the most apparent solution which is suggested frequently
envisages the recruitment of Cubans who have no political affilia
tions. While this may be possible, experience has indicated that
it is not probable. Those Cubans in the U. S. who have associate
with U. S. personnel and those who speak English are generally
marked. Those whose language capabilities and economic stature
combine to limit their social mobility are more likely to turn to,
accept and become involved in the social, political or cultural
cloisters of Cubans in the U. S.
There are additional political and psychological
problems in seaking recruits from among Cubans who have fled
and generally desire to remain united with families and friends,
Their motivation to participate in activities against Castro gener
ally can be measured in terms of their assimilation and economi
success in the U. 5. Experience has shown that internal opp
ists may resent external Cuban leadership. As the exile groups
compete for political prestige and material support, so do the
representatives of the internal resistance groups.
•
The problems of exiles attempting to determine
the extent of U. S. commitment and associated security implications
are discussed elsewhere in this paper.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_153.jpeg ---
13-00000
I SECRET
:
Timing.
Obviously, the successful execution of well-
anned clandestine or covert operations is time consuming.
ment, isolation and training cannot be accomplished in a matter of
days. There is no standby reservoir of multi-purpose agents. The
operations themselves call for split second timing and are subject both
to nature's elements (weather, tides, moon, season) and other unanti-
cipated and unpredictable circumstances (Cuban alerts, contact with
patrols, compromise of internal contacts, actions of anti-Castro
groups, or other world events).
quirame
Timing problems are compounded by the increased
and the requirements for synchronised actions,
More effective operations can be undertaken when
there is some general continuity in the program and there is an oppor-
tunity to plan in greatest detail. From a practical standpoint, it is
extremely difficult to maintain individual or group motivation and aggres-
siveness when operations are delayed, aborted, canalled or subjected to
‚ continual modification.
3.
ASSETS
In considering U. S. assets for covert and clandestine operations
against Cuba, it is well to review briefly in an historical context, the
situation which faces the U. 8.
Prior to Castro's assumption of power, U. S. efforts in the field
of intelligence and clandestine operations in Latin America lagged behind
efforts in other more immediate problem areas of the world. At the time
Castro assumed central in Cuba, there was much open controversy on the
question of Castro's subservience to communism, but generally it was
assumed that the change of goverment in Cuba was in the well-known
Latin tradition. Later, it was realized that the change of government
was not just a change in personalities, but a revolutionary change in
governmental system. At this point, early in 1960, plans were developed
to assist the people of Cuba in overthrowing their government. This plan
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_154.jpeg ---
13-00000
CORE!
culminated in the abortive Bay of Pigs Operation in late April 1961.
It has been conceded that the Bay of Pigs Operation caused many dis-
sidents and potential resistance groups to expose themselves and be
he Cuban security operations which came
operation.
the
the
During the six month period which fallowed the events of April
1961, the U. §. was not in a position to expose itself further to any
suggestion of clandestine actions against Guba. The experts involved
in that operation were reassigned and little or no effort was made to
further endanger any residual assets in Cuba which may have survived
the Cuban security operations of the spring and summer of 1961.
By Lefe 1964, another effort was
assets were available for operations in Co
an inventory revealed that the few reliable assets in the target area
were essentially intelligence agents and could not be spared for con-
version to clandestine operations. Gastro had consolidated his security
mechanism to the point that by early 1962 it was quite clear that faser-
tions of agents in useful areas would be most precarious. The large
reservair of motivated Cubans who had participated in the Bay of Pigs
Operation were either imprisoned or had lost their cover. They were
no longer an available source for clandestine operations. During the
first nine months of 1962, the emphasis was placed on intelligence
gathering rather than clandestine operations or political action in the
target area.
Because of certain operational difficulties most of the opera-
tional missions undertaken during the spring and summer of 1962
were aborted or compromitsed. Castro's accusation, coupled with
the pubile
ace and "confessions" of "U. 5. agente” cáññed
kused
the operational program to be periodically discontinued. No attempt
was made during or immediately after the missile crisis to continue
the program.
4.
ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
The role of the Department of Defense in clandestine and covert
areas has been the subject of much controversy both within the Depart-
ment of Defense and within the Central Intelligence Agency.
SECRET
1.
- -

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_157.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
and ships with trained crews are adaptable to infiltration and exfiltra-
tion missions. DoD stocks of arms, foodstuffs and equipment alöng
with Bobbility to nanitive, package and ship for serial or
dollsory quantities of supplies is a significant asse
There is a general misunderstanding concerning the use of
Army Special Forces units, Navy SEAL teams, Air Force Jungle Jim
organisations or Marine Corps special units in covert and clandestine
operations. While it is entirely possible and feasible to convert
individuals or units for eländestine or covert operations, the basic
mission of Special Forces originally was oriented toward the organiza-
tion of resistance forces in support of overt military operations. Subse
quently, the charter of Special Forces was expanded to incorpora
counter-insurgency operations in friendly territory. Both of thone
missions are essentially overt in nature and there is a lack of experience
and doctrina for the commitment of Special Forces in clandestine or
covert operations. This generally applies to units of the other mili»
tary Services. Any major reorientation of the mission of these units
will detract from their current requirements and could jeopardise,
for example, the ability of our Special Forces to assist in the organiza-
tion of a resistance in Cuba in support of a conventional military opera❤
tion there.
5.
INTELLIGENCE
It is essential to an understanding of the problem to realise
that since late 1961, all U. 8. intelligence estimates have indivated
that there is little likelihood of an internally sparked Cuban résistance
to be of any significance. According to CIA there is little possibility
of getting advance information of any uprising without this information
also reaching officials of the Castro Regime. It is also estimated that
there is little likelihood that any resistance groups would be able to
"hold out" in any organized form for more than a week or two. Castro
personally is quite aware of the potential of a guerrilla resistance and
moves ruthlessly, committing disproportionate forces to ensure that
the spark does not mature.
:
11
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_155.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
the
By charter
urter the Department of Defense does nót
principle role in the fields of clandestine or covert operations.
Department of Defense is not specifically precluded from assuming
principle role and, in fact, there is specific authority for the
Department of Defense to assume such a role when the scope of a
3 particular operation exceeds the capabilities of the Central Intelli
gents Agency. From U. S. lessons learned in Laos and Guba (during
the Bay of Pige Operation) the size of these operations were considerad
beyond the capabilities of the CIA. (At least the resources of men,
money and materiel available to CIA were strained severely). In auch
circumstances when DoD assets far exceed things of GIA; if
Preferable to give DoD the primary role and responsibility and
GIA render required support. Again security becomes a major factór
when an operation reaches such a magnitude that DoD is forced to
assume the responsibility. Many argue, with some justification, that
when the operation is of a magnitude that the DoD must assume the
responsibility, it is at the point of losing its cover or clandestine
wrappings and DoD may suffer the consequences.
Except for participation during World War II, few individuals
in the Department of Defense were concerned with clandestine opera-
tions prior to 1960. Experiences of the military in Germany, Laos,
Cuba and Vietnam served to underline many of the capabilities and
limitations of the military in those fields. There are many emotional
organizational conflict of interest aspects involved in a considerațion
of the role the military should assume. One view is that the military
un and should assume a greater role immediately. Supporters of this
view base their arguments on some demonstrated inefficiencies com-
mitted under CIA management in the past, the planning experience
DoD, and the breadth and depth of resources in men, money and
materiei available to the Department of Defense. Some of the more
emotional support of this view stems from the military's frustration
of CIA's apparent inability to take bold actions (probably combined
with some inborn jingoism),
:
SECRET.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_159.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
Following are examples of the types of activities which could
be undertaken. This is not an exhaustive list, but is presented to
Illustrate the types of activity which might be considered.
Intelligence and Counterintelligence
Interrogation of refugees.
Counterintelligence in U. S.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Legal travellers.
(4)
(5)
Clandestine intelligende
Air and naval surveillance.
(6)
Communications surveillance.
(7)
External sources (where Cuhm is repre-
sented officially or quasi-officially or where refugees and
travellers can be reached).
(8)
(9)
Intelligence provided by third countries.
Defectors (inside or outside Cuba). It is
important to note that the security mechanism in Cuba renders
suspected potential defectors relatively inaccessible. The
development of a defector program requires vast amounts of
operational intelligence which has not been available. There
are additional problems in seeking defections from among those
who have families. The Cuban security apparatus combines
with geography to further restrict attempts on the part of many
who might defect if there was any reason to believe they could
leave Cuba. Those who have sought asylum in other embassies
in Havana have been refused exit visas for such prolonged periods
that their information, when finally released, is practically useless.
(10) Penetrations (inside or outside Cuba). Extreme
caution must be used to prevent the compromise of any penetrations
which can be made. Penetrations in the communist apparatus out-
side of Cuba may be of little utility or Cuban requirements of such
low priority as to limit the scope of such attempts, me
OP SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_16.jpeg ---
13-00000
6. Excerpts from 202-10002-10117
January 31, 1964
"A Contingency Plan for a Coup in Cuba" ·
-30-
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_156.jpeg ---
13-00000
.b
SECRET
proponents in DoD of a more cautious
presch
sensitive to the commitment of U. 8. military: resourcen in
unconventional field at the expense of implicit responsibilities in
the conventional area. There is soms opposition on moralistic
grounds and there is concern that the inability to maintain security
in any sizeable covert or clandestine operation could subsequently:
reflect adversely on the military establishment or the professional
military as a group. Other objections include a reluctance to
assume the responsibilities and risks entailed in operations of this
nature and a preference to play a supporting role to the "profes❤
„sionalfam” of CIA. – Some bureaucratic or organizational lethargy
may also influence military views.
In the past, the military has played an essential role in three
major categories » money, men and material. From the fiscal stand-
point, the Department of Defense can provide väst expenditures with
relatively great flexibility,
The vast resources in manpower of the DoD (with military
technical and linguistic skills, overseas experience, physical con-
ditioning and personal dedication and aggressiveness) provides a
very lucrative patential for DoD participation in clandestine and
covert actions. The major problem in this connection is the sopara-
tion of the individual from the military Service. The mechanics of
individual cover, dummy records, and the administrative processing
is essentially no great problem. The difficulties appear in the con-
sideration of family and military associations. It is relatively easy
to quickly Isolate and "sheep dip" an ais crew or a small boat crew
for one short mission; however, this process is not easily extended
for any protracted period. There is usually a requirement to consider
carefully the pay and allowances of military personnel operating
independently or in conjunction with CIA personnel on clandestine
and covert operations.
The material assets of the Department of Defense can play a
major role in GIA's overall operation. DoD can provide cover for
many of CIA's training, supply and storage installations. DoD is
involved in surveillance activities. The DoD inventory of aircraft
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_158.jpeg ---
}
13-00000
SECRET
of
There has been a lack of useful intelligence on Cuba. This
has caused the U. 8. to place primary importance on clandestine
intelligence operations with a corresponding lack of emphasis.
other clandestine operations. In order to undertake operations,
vast amounts of current operational intelligence are needed. The
priority for this operational type intelligence has been relegated
to a relatively unimportant station in the spectrum of our intelli-
gence requirements for Cuba. This is particularly true when there
are limited assets and so much pressure to obtain reliable informa-
tion or confirmation on sophisticated conventional weapons or Soviet
activities. Normally,“ different methods of operation are employed
in a different physical environment for those seeking operational
intelligence.
It should be pointed out that the lack of intelligence has been
used as a crutch in net pressing for more clandestine operations ·
actions. This view can be justified, but no commander who commits
forces on the battlefield ever knows all he wants to know about his
enemy. Somewhere in between lies the answer. There must be an
acceptance of certain gaps in operational intelligence and consequently
some additional operational risks; otherwise, no meaningful actions
will ever be taken.
.6.'
PARAMETERS OF FUTURE ACTION
This portion of the paper is designed to indicate in general
terms the latitude of clandestine and covert actions based upon past
experience and those pertinent factors which might serve to limit
or modify U. 8. action in these areas. This should not be interpreted
to indicate the limits of future actions.
Clandestine and covert activities prior to and during the Bay
of Pigs operațion can be characterized as bold and far reaching. The
future orientation of U. S. activity in this field is conditioned largely
by the failure of that operation. Clandestine and covert actions since
April 1961 can be summarized as being cautious, intermittent, and low
level. The current attention directed towards "things Cuban" places
even more stringent requirements on U. S. activities in the clandestine
and covert environment.
12
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_160.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
"
:..
SECRET
b.
Propaganda and Psychological Operations
(1): Radio and television
::
(black, white or grey).
(2) Printed material (mail, airdrop, or packed
with other material destined for Cuba). Airdrop in severaly
limited by Cubs's air defense capability.
(3). Radio and television and printed material
to Latin America.
(4)
(5)
Counterpropaganda.
Rumor, threat, or other campaigns using all
available communication assets, to include telephone, Propaganda
should reach the proper target, should be consistent (Guha versus
other parts of Latin America). Psychological actions could include
air dropping of foodstuffs and medicine, Russian language broad-
casts, large scale military actions near Guha of a deception
nature, rumors and "plants" of information, etc.
Political Actions
(L) Inside Cuba to instigate demonstrations,
establish a resistance net, or to take a particular action.
Cubana.
(2) External to instigate demonstrations against
(3) Tours of Cuban exiles to Latin America and
elsewhere (educators, jurists, labor leaders, women, youth,
‘entertainers, religious and cultural groups, etc.). NOTE: Many
of the above-actions can be accomplished overtly.
Economic Actions
(1) Sabotage of agriculture, power, industry,
internal or external transport, communications, administration,
or storage facilities.
SECRET
-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_161.jpeg ---
13-00000
f.
SECRET
Covert operations to prevent sale of pur
chase of items destined for Cuba or coming from Cuba, (Sugar,
tropicals, etc.) NOTE: Since the Sino-Soviet commitment to
Cuba is preponderant, a large portion is not susceptible to U. S.
action; however, the remaining trade with the Free World,
although relatively minor, is critical to Cuba and provides
the U. S. with a incrative target.
(3) Counterfaiting. Because Cuba has essentially
a barter market and mass distribution is difficult, this may not
represent a useful activity. There are other very far reaching
implications which must be considered against a relatively meager
and short lived gain.
Sabotage and Harrassing Actions
(1) Sabotage of leaders homes, offices and
military installations. (Economic sabotage included in para-
graph d above),
(2)
Actions designed to withdraw people from
harvest or to overwork military elements. (To include actions
from rumors to major military exercises).
(3)
Radio or television intrusion or Jamming.
(4) Bribing, embarrassing, blackmailing, assass-
inating, coercing and kidnapping leaders.
(S) Attack, seisure, search or harrassment and
sabotage of air and naval traffic.
(6) Attack, intimidation and harrassment of Cuban
representatives abroad.
Paramilitary Operations
(1) Raids.
(2) Prison breaks.
(3) Weapons caches.
(4) Reconnaissance in force.
SECRET
1
...

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_162.jpeg ---
13-00000
"NOSANËN WICH
MACHE
SECRET
7.
Provocations or auto provocations. Contrived
perations can be undertaken; however, it appears preferable.
capitalize on real-provocations which occur almost daily,
in some form. Through political and psychological handling
many of these real provocations can be developed into provoca»
tive acts.
FUTURE OPTIONS
A discussion of future options should be related specifically
to the overall objective and should consider the factors indicated in
paragraph 2 above.
There may be advantages to taking clandestine actions fór
actions sake alone in order to (a) demonstrate and publicize contimed
Cuban resistance, (b) keep the resistance potential alive, (c) accede
to demands for a spectacular action, (d) indicate a reprisal för actions
by the Cuban Regime, (e) test, probe, deceive or harrass the internal
security mechanism in Cuba and (f) establish a psychological climate
for other overt actions.
So long as Castro remains the "David" and the U. 8. reinains
the "Goliath," the U. S. will have a major problem of image making
in Cuba, Latin America and the world. ´ Since April 1962, there are
indications that the fascination for "Fidelismo" has waned significantly
but to the Cubans, the Latin Americans and many other new-born states,
Castro is still the "David" and the only Latin who has successfully
challenged the North American giant. The recognition and support of
residance leader (real or imaginary) in Cuba would only provide
rtial solution to this problem.
'As the economic situation in Cuba becomes more intolerable,
the U. S. may expect greater dissension and more manifestations of
unrest, to include outbreaks of violence. At some point, the U. S.
could be called upon to support openly such an effort. Obviously, it
would be extremely embarrassing to the U. S. to be unable to respond
before the resistance is crushed completely. In any event, it would be
extremely difficult for the U. S. to support such a resistance in a clan-
destine or covert manner for more than a few days. Such support could
serve to alert Cuba to U. S. intentions.
16
SEGRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_166.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
to balance possibly conflicting interests and to determine which, in any
given circumstance, shall have priority.
Strategy and Tactics
We must keep in mind constantly the relationship between what happens
in Cuba and the overall struggle between ourselves and the Communists.
We should seek to insure that the Cuban situation will develop in a way
that will:
a) lead to the collapse or overthrow of the Castro regime;
b) demonstrate to the Cuban people and to the world at large that
communism is not a solution for the problems of a developing
country;
c) discredit Castro and his associates and their methods of opera-
tion throughout the Americas;
d) insure that the burden imposed by Cuba on the Soviet Union and
the satellites adds substantially to the mounting evidence that
efforts to export communist revolution are unsuccessful and ex-
cessively costly.
Our focus should always be on the first of these objectives--the
end of the communist regime in Cuba. But pending achievement of this,
we can move toward the other objectives. And they, after all, are of
major importance to our overall strategic purposes.
TOP-GBOROT-
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_163.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
ET
OLUME
Theoretically, the most desirable event which could take
plade would envisage a major split of Cuban leadership involving
relatively proportionate military and internal security forces. It
is difficult under present circumstances to visualize a Cuban leader
of such stature even considering such a move, since he has no real
assurance of immediate U. 6. military, economic and political sup-
port so vital to his tenure and so necessary to prevent a counter coup
from those deriving strength from the heavy Sine-Soviet economic
orientation of the present regime.
The U. S. continues to be extremely vulnerable to ac
suto provocation by the Cuban Regime. It is not beyond the realm
of possibility to have Cuban directed attacks of Guban military ele-
ments (disguised as exiles or U. S. personnel) on soft and emotional
targets in Cuba. . Such an action could serve to help Castro consolidate
internally and to seriously embarrass the U. 8. internationally.
SUMMARY
The U. 8. finds itself in an uncomfortable position of waiting
for the breaks in Cuba and not knowing precisely when or how the
breaks will occur. As time goes on the changes for an internally
inspired revolt become increasingly more remote. Barring a major
political schism in which major elements of the security forces are
split, there is little promise of an internally sparked revolt of suf-
ficient magnitude to permit the U. S. to muster multilateral representa-
tion or support and intervene on behalf of this resistance.
According to authoritative sources, the U. S. will receive Hitle
or not advance notice of such an uprising and according to intelligence
estimates there is little likelihood of such an uprising surviving for
more than a few days. Also, it has been indicated that there is little
likelihood of such a resistance could gain control of a radio station
to request outside assistance. (It is recognized, however, that this
probably would be one of the principle aims of any such action group. )
17.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_164.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
1
Blöc
So long as the Sino-Soviet Bloc continues to subsidize Cuba,
the internal economic situation will probably not become intolerable
for those committed to the Castro Regime. Stub Soviet Bisc
would stand to suffer severely if they underto
in their support of Cuba.
•
Castro has cautiously avoided provocative actions of sufficient
magnitude to incur the wholesale wrath of the U. 8. or to provide a
juridical basis for overt intervention. To Castro's liking, U. 8. options
have been narrowed to U. S. instigated open conflict economic pressures
or to a time-consuming and frustrating multilateral approach utilising
the QAS mechanism.
The U. S. may again be afforded the
Increased
overt actions (such as blockade or other stringent measures). Unless
preplanning on this or other actions is accomplished beforelland, covert
actions in support of these overt measures will be limited to only those
opportunities upon which the U. S. can capitalize with the means at its
disposal at the time.
From the standpoint of the Cuban Regime, there appears to be
little likelihood that any clandestine actions will be taken directly
against the U. S. However, the recent aircraft attacks or warnings
against U. S. boats indicates the possibility of uncontrolled action on
the part of individuals of the Castro Regime.
18
P SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_165.jpeg ---
13-00000
_FT
AMORANDUM FOR THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL'S EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
(Prepared for the Meating of
FROM:
Coordinator of Cuba Affairs
-
February 1963, 4 P.M.)
SUBJECT:
Psychological Program in Support of U.S. Policy on Cuba
Objectives
The basic program adopted by the Executive Committee on January
25, 1963 sets forth major objectives for our policy toward Cuba. It als
commits us to "be prepared to increase the political, economic, psycho-
logical and military pressures, as appropriate opportunities present
themselves or can be created."
This memorandum outlines a program that will meet the psychologica.
requirements of our overall policy.
Role of Psychological Operations
A successful psychological campaign cannot be viewed solely as a
propaganda exercise or an informational program. It should cover action
and statements--all that is said or done solely or primarily for psycho'
logical effect. This definition sets off psychological activities from
those actions undertaken primarily for their dírect value--whether in tỉ
fields of intelligence, military, political, or economic action.
One of the tasks of psychological operations is to exploi ɔther
___vities to maximum advantage, or to seek to minimize any negative as·
pects of such activities. In designing and carrying out action program
directed at Cuba, it shall be the task of the Coordinator and his Group
037, 780 Coater K5065
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_169.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
- 5 -
Specific programs to carry out this kind of approach to the Cuban
problem are submitted in Annexes A and B.
Audiences and Targets
The psychological program should be directed at the following primary
audiences or target groups:
1) the Cuba people. Our goal should be to encourage dissatisfaction
with the present and hope for the future once Castroism is eli-
minminated.
It should be made clear that the next chapter of Cuba's
history must be written by the Cubans. But they should know that
they will have friendly support from others.
2) the Castro regime. Our goal should be to create dissension, doubt
and hopelessness inside the ruling clique.
3) Latin America. In programs directed at the peoples and govern-
..
ments of the hemisphere, our goal should be to weaken the influ-
ence of the Cuban regime and its propaganda, to encourage solid-
arity within the OAS family, to counter Cuban influence in key
groups (youth, labor, intellectuals), to encourage actions that
counteract Cuban programs of subversion and insurrection.
4) the Soviet Union and other. Communist states. To picture Cuba
as a steady drain on already limited resources, to insure that i
is such a drain, to encourage the Soviets to limit and eventuall
eliminate their involvement in Cuba.
* SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_17.jpeg ---
13-00000
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY :: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER : 198-10004-10020
RECORDS SERIES : CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR: MULTIPLE
FROM:
TO :
Cuba Selected Documents
#1
TITLE :
DATE : 03/01/63
PAGES : 135
SUBJECTS: PLANNING AND POLICY, CUBA
POLICY OBJECTIVES, CUBA
CONTINGENCY PLANNING, CUBA
LATIN AMERICA SECURITY
ACTIONS TO IMPEDE MOVEMENT OF SUBVERSIVES
CARIBBEAN SURVEILLANCE
U.S. MILITARY INTERVENTION, CUBA
OPERATION MONGOOSE
BLOCKADE OF CUBA
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS : OPEN IN FULL
CURRENT STATUS: OPEN
TE OF LAST REVIEW : 10/07/97
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : Califano Papers, Box 6, Folder 7. Package of proposed
actions to be used against Cuba, including operations
to apply pressure to the Cuban regime to oust Castro
and potential reaction to US involvement.
[R]
-
ITEM IS RESTRICTED-
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_167.jpeg ---
13-00000
-->
3
We have the possibility of insuring that so long as Cuba remains
Commmunist it will serve as an open, bleeding wound that will weaken the
Communist cause generally. This strategic concept is one which the
Communists have tried to use against us.
Our tactical approach should be designed to fit this overall concept.
It calls for the utilization of every available weapon in our aresenal
and engagement, day-in and day-out, in a multi-faceted struggle at all
levels.
Our initial aim should be to weaken steadily the capability, con-
fidence and will of the enemy (inside and outside Cuba) and, correspond-'.
ingly, to strengthen our side. We need not, indeed ought not, stake every-
thing on one great effort. Nor should we concentrate on simply building
up our forces and husbanding them "until the right time comes" for a final
showdown.
•
Instead, our effort should be directed toward achieving an unbroken
series of small successes, encompassing gains on the part of anti-Castro
elements and failures on the part of the regime itself. Our aim should
be that the end of each day'would see the position and prospects of the
Castro regime and little worse than they had been at sunrise.
A factory breakdown because of a shoŕtage of spare parts or sabotage, ·
an increase in absenteeism, lengthened queues at the food stores, failure
to get a field planted--whether because of neglect or lack of seed, a

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_168.jpeg ---
13-00000
- 4
resort to terrorist methods against the populace, an unexplained fire,
creation of suspicion in a minor but key official, the sudden appearance
of antiregime alogans on walls, a defection from the armed forcesé-these
and similar things, whether major or minor, and over and over again on
a mounting scale, will have a cumulative impact, In the long run, they'
can be equivalent to a major victory.
The important thing is to keep the pressure on, to never give the
regime a respite, to see that the series of small defeats and setbacks
'Our
is unbroken and unending. Our purpose is to create a situation in which
the regime and its supporters steadily lose hope and heart, in which they
come to accept the certainty of eventual defeat.
Meanwhile, repercussions would be felt throughout the Communist
world. Assistance to the regime would increasingly be regarded as a
"rat hole" operation. The "example of Cuba" would become the reverse of
expectations; fidelismo would become a term of opprobrium.
In short, the goal is to bring about the elimination of the Castro
regime without resort to direct and massive force. We cannot rule our
the possibility that some reliance on force may become necessary to insur
final victory for anti-Castro forces. But the greater and more effec-
tivo is the effort herein outlined, the more we are likely to insure that
overt force requirements will be minimal.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_170.jpeg ---
13-00000
-
6
->
5) Other countries. To insure understanding of what is involved
in the Cuban situation, to use Cuba to disprove that communism
provides useful answers to the needs of developing countries,
to expose the continuing danger of communist efforts to export
· revolution.
6) the Home Base. To provide the American people and the Congress
with the full facts of the Cuban situation within the limits of
legitimate security considerations.
Assets
the
The psychological program toward Cuba should utilize the full range
of the Government's capabilities for action and information. These in-
clude, among others: a) public statements by the President and other
officials;
b) informational assets such as the public affairs an‹
Congressional relations agencies of State,
Defense and other agencies;
c) the Government's research and analysis facilities;
d) overseas information programs in all media,
especially the facilities of the U.S. Information
Agency;
e) the diplomatic mechanism for both formal and
informal contacts;
f) capabilities for unattributed programs of action
and information.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_176.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
-
- 5
2. Cuba represents a steady drain on already limited Soviet and
3.
bloc resources; every shipment to Cuba means things do not appear
on Soviet shelves.
Castro really supports the Chinese, not Moscow; he is using
Soviet help to promote Castroism not Moscow's policy.
The above lists do not pretend to be exhaustive. They are but the
beginning of a catalog of themes we can exploit in our information and
propaganda offensive.
S& Clean
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_173.jpeg ---
13-00000
2
3.
Clarification of our position on "non-invasion" would be desira-
ble. This could be covered in 1 above. It should be clear that we do not
regard invasion of Cuba by the United States as a desirable or useful
course. But the possibility of such action in given circumstances cannot
The door should be left open for any action that we and
be eliminated.
our allies in the hemisphere may regard as necessary in the future to
counter aggressive moves by the Cuban regime.
4. We need to have clearly in mind our position regarding a possi-
ble internal revolt. This, too, could be covered in 1 above. We should
avoid statements for the present which could reasonably be expected to
encourage an open revolt. We should avoid for the present anything that
could be read as a firm pledge to come to the aid of anyone who moves
against Castro. We should make clear, however, that we are prepared to
support and cooperate with any elements who succeed in ending communist
dominance in Cuba and who are committed to establishing in Cuba a free
✓ and democratic government responsive to the desires of its own people.
5. We should exploit by available means all evidence of internal
discontent and opposition. Defections from the Cuban regime should be
exploited extensively and quickly as soon as security considerations are
· mat.
.6. The Coordinator should arrange for up-to-date surveys of the
following:
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_174.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
CUST
a) programs now underway in the psychological field;
b) U.S. capabilities in this field with a view to exposing any
obvious remediable gaps in our resources for conducting a signi-
ficant psychological effort against Cuba;
c) Castro's propaganda machine--how does it work? how much effort
goes into it? how can we weaken it?
d) major lines of the Cuban propaganda offensive--favorite themes,
techniques, principal targets, etc.;
e) current position of Castro and his regime in Latin America--
main areas of influence, by country and by groups.
f) the past record on leaflet drops--how effective, advantages of
'
plane vs. balloon drops, comparison of delivery by other means,
possibilities of such a program being used to attack us in the
UN or among the Cuban people.
Themes for Information Programs
Information media should exploit the following themes to the max-
imum extent practicable. Hard data supporting these themes should be
spotted on a day-to-day basis and used. Commentaries and discussions
should be tailored to take full advantage of these attitudes.
(To Cuban audiences)
1. Castroism is doomed; it is on the slippery slope to oblivion.
SPELT
P

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_172.jpeg ---
13-00000
ANMIX A
Guidelines for Attributable Programs
Current Requirements
1. There should be a statement, preferably by the President, ex-
plaining overall U.S. policy toward the Cuban question. It would provide
clarification of where we stand on Cuba and how we hope to see the future'
develop. It would provide the basis for statements, private and public,
for all other officials concerned. It would inform the Cubans how we re-
gard their future; tell Latin Americans how we see the problem and our
view of their role; underline' to the Soviet bloc our determination to
oppose communism in this hemisphere; further clarify for our own people
the seriousness of the problem and our determination to support the cause
of freedom in Cuba with all feasible means.
The Coordinator should arrange for preparation of such a statement
and submit a draft to the White House.
2. It is our policy to seek elimination, or at least material re-
duction, of the Soviet military presence in Cuba. Efforts now underway
to achieve this end should be given a reasonable chance. If they fail
to produce the desired result within a reasonable time, we should be pre-
pared to move forward along other lines. The Coordinator should develop
a program to meet this contingency. Meanwhile, the continuing presence
of Soviet forces should be described as an exacerbating influence in
East-West relations and a symbol of foreign domination and control in Cuba.
ts0051
SECRET
3

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_171.jpeg ---
13-00000
DA OR ST
-7
->
:
:
Coordination and Guidance
In carrying out the kind of many-sided offensive described herein,
i
it will be necessary to provide for coordinating various programs. We
must be sure that what we do in one area reinforces what we do elsewhere.
It will be necessary to provide careful and regular policy guidance to
those responsible for action. This task is assigned to the Coordinator
for Cuban Affairs. He should establish the necessary machinery on an
inter-departmental basis.
U.S. Posture toward Cuba
The picture we should seek to create is one of a confident and de-
cisive United States moving forward in cooperation with its other friends,
dealing with the Cuban situation but not exclusively preoccupied with
Castro. We should not appear to be in doubt or confusion.
We should take
note of developments in Cuba promptly and react to them quickly. Our
answer to claims, charges or attacks should be swift. Our machinery must
be geared to permit answers to Castro and his henchmen immediately and
effectively. If he makes a speech tonight, our reply should be on the
airwaves tomorrow at the latest.
Cur approach should not be defensive. We should not confine ourselve
to answering Castro but as much as possible force him onto the defensive.
We should insure that he is required to do the answering, the explaining,
the disagreeing as much as possible.
Attachments:
Annex A
-
Guidelines for Attributable Programs
Annex B Guidelines for Unattributable Programs EB 11 1933
-
i
TITT
83m

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_175.jpeg ---
1
13-00000
SECKES
2.
3.
4°
5.
6.
Cuba is an unwilling instrument of Soviet policy, subject to
the whims and moods of a foreign power.
Moscow will use Cuba as it sees fit and for its own purposes,
giving help and withdrawing it to suit the Kremlin's desires.
Castro has isolated his country from its traditional friends,
from the hemisphere in which its roots of history, culture,
religion, and well-being are.sunk.
Communism has failed to solve the problems of Cuba--has lowered >
rather than raised its standard of living.
The Cuban revolution has been perverted and betrayed.
7. Freedom, independence and diversity are the "wave of the future."
(To Latin American audiences)
1. Use the above as appropriate.
2.
Castro and the Russians are using Cuba as a base for subversion,
espionage and sabotage against neighboring states.
3. Castroism promises bloodshed; terror and economic stagnation.
"
4. The Hemisphere's most promising course is vigorous efforts to ?
achieve the goals of the Alliance for Progress.
(To Soviet and Bloc audiences)
1.
The above as appropriate.
SECTET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_177.jpeg ---
13-00000
411
!
ANNEX B
It is the judgement of the Coordinator that this annex covering
intelligence and covert actions should be submitted separately after the
Executive Committee reaches a conclusion on the overall psychological
program and the attributable activities set forth in Annex A.
See par
Page 2
4
above
$
TS 0051
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_179.jpeg ---
13-00000
... :
SECRET sensiti.
SUBJECT: Future Cuban Leadership
13 may 196
1963
INTRODUCTION
Following is a proposal for the creation of an imaginary
Cuban leader. This proposal is presented primarily to fill gaps
existing in the present policy study. It will become obvious that
'this proposal can be utilized in conjunction with current programs
as well as many of those programs proposed for the future. It
may be necessary to address this proposal or a similar proposal
separately and in advance of the policy study; however, in the
event no pressing requirement exists, it is suggested that this
proposal be considered in conjunction with the policy study and
handled on a closely held basis.
REASON FOR PROPOSAL
Following are listed a number of indications that the leader-
ship question will be addressed in the near future:
a. With the termination of U.S. support to the Cuban
Revolutionary Council (CRC) a vacuum has been created. Various
exile groups in the U.S. and elsewhere will be vying for recognition
and support in an attempt to fill this void.
b. There has been constant pressure on the U. S.
and on other Latin American countries to recognize a government
in exile. This proposal could serve to lessen or eliminate much
of this political and psychological pressure.
C. This proposal could serve to reduce the bickering
among exile groups and may serve to resolve some of the problems
of Cuban exile unification.
OLCHE Sensitive
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_178.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
DATE RECEIVED DATE OF DOCUMENT NUMBER OF COPIES
TOP SECRET
DOCUMENT RECORD
(AR 380-5)
OFFICE OR HEADQUARTERS OF ORIGINATOR
2-11-63
COPY NUMBER(S)
none
TS 0051
TYPE OF DOCUMENT AND ADDRESSER(S)
LOCAL TS CONTROL NUMBER (If applicable)
Mr. Califano
UNCLASSIFIED SUBJECT OR SHORT TITLE
Draft Memo for NSC Exec. Comte
Psychological Program in Support of U.S. Policy on Cuba
NUMBER AND DESCRIPTION OF INCLOSURES TO DOCUMENT Ündicate addition and/or deletion of inclosures with dates)
Annex A (5 pgs) and Annex B (1 pg)
COPY NO.
DISTRIBUTION DATA
ADDRESSEE (Print or type)
DATE OF DISTRIBUTION
COPY NO.
ADDRESSEE (Print or type)
FOR:
CHECK
☐ ACTION
*
Mr. Califano
INTRA-OFFICE ROUTING DATA
INFORMATION
TO
SUSPENSE DATE
CHECK
TO
NAMES OF ALL PERSONS HANDLING ATTACHED-DOCUMENT OR WHO HAVE BEEN INFORMED OF ITS CONTENT WILL BE LISTED BELOW
NAME (Print or type)
NAME (Print or typa)
A. Carter
DATE
2-11-63
DATE
FORM
DA₁ 969
1 MAY 60
EDITION OF 1 JAN 58 IS OBSOLETE.
REGRADED UNCLASSIFIED WHEN SEPARATED FROM
CLASSIFIED INCLOSURES

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_180.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
i
SECRET
"SENSITIVE
d. The proposal could emphasize the development of
a native "David" in opposition to Castro, the Cuban "Goliath." This
could serve the U.S. image by making Castro the "Goliath" rather
than the "David" who opposes the "North American Giant. "
e. This proposal could serve to prevent the U.S. from
making premature commitments to a leader or a particular exile group
and could be used as a device to test exile response.
f. This proposal could retain for the U.S. the ability
to control future selections of leaders or groups (timing and political
ideologies).
g.
This proposal could permit the U.S. on a progres-
sive basis to influence the idealogies of the resistance and thus to
influence the platform of a future Cuban Government.
h. The publicity associated with the prolonged existence
of a resistance in Cuba can serve to delay the furtherance of the de
facto recognition of the present Cuban Regime.
OBJECTIVE
To create an imaginary leader or image of resistance in Cuba.
This image would serve as a focal point for resistance directed against
Castro by Cubans or Latin Americans.
DEVELOPMENT
An imaginary name of a resistance leader could be developed
utilizing a popular name from Cuban history, a name associated with
resistance in Cuba or a newly devised name. The name selected
should typify a person who is friendly to the Cuban people, is anti-
communist, is willing to fight against the Regime, and is little-but
tough. There is no requirement for a detailed staff study in order
2
TOP SECRET Sensitive

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_18.jpeg ---
13-00000
1.
TOP SEADEL
ULUNET
UNCLASSIFIED
POSSIBLE ACTIONS TO PROVOKE, HARRASS, OR DISRUPT
Operation SMASHER:
- CUBA-
a. Objective: The objective is to disrupt/disable military and
commercial communications facilities in Cuba.
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by the clandestine introduction of
a "special" vacuum tube into selected communications equipment. The tube,
which is available, is virtually undetectable inasmuch as its effectiveness is
due to the insertion of a chemical compound in the base of the tube. The
chemical, when heated becomes a conductor, when cool a non-conductor.
2.
Operation FREE. RIDE:
_
a. Objective: The objective is to create unrest and dissension amongst
the Cuban people.
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by airdropping valid Pan American
or KLM one-way airline tickets good for passage to Mexico City, Caracas,
etc. (none to the U.S.). Tickets could be intermixed with other leaflets
planned to be dropped. The number of tickets dropped could be increased.
The validity of the tickets would have to be restricted to a time period.
3.
Operation TURN ABOUT:
a. Objective: The objective is to create indications to Fidel Castro that
his value to the revolutionary cause has diminished to the point where plans are:
being made for his "removal".
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by the use of intelligence means the
crecendo increasing until it culminates in Castro's discovery of the mechanism
or hardware.
Reproduction of this document in whole
or in part is prohibited swayi rith
permission of the issuing office.
Incl 5/1
Special Handling of this paper is requested.
Access should be limited to individuals requiring
the information hersin in order te oarry out their
official duties.
This document consists of
Copy # of
3.
pages.
111
copys.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_183.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
CONCLUSION
Based on a consideration of factors indicated above, it
appears that the U.S. should immediately undertake to implement
this proposal, determining at 30 to 60 day future intervals what
additional action should be taken to improve, reduce, or change
the image during the subsequent 30 or 60 day period.
Jak Patchell
James K. Patchell
Lt Colonel,
· USA
SCORE
5

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_181.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET Sensitive
11
to determine this name. "The Little Bull," "The Little Worm, "
"The Friendly Worm," "The Fighting Friend," "The Tough Peasant,
or any such name which is acceptable and meaningful in Spanish
could suffice. Over a period of several months the name could be
"dropped" or leaked through U.S. officialdom, in diplomatic channels,
in intelligence channels or within the Cuban exile community. Specific
acts against the Regime could be credited to this individual or mem-
bers of his group. Communications could be arranged between this
individual and his subordinates to be picked up either by Castro's
censors or by radio intercept in Cuba or in the U. S.
After a period of time, all unexplained incidents and actions
for which credit has not been seized by some other exile group would
automatically be ascribed to our imaginary friend. At some point in
time it could be leaked that the U.S. is, in fact, supporting this
imaginary person. Similarly, other Latin American countries may,
without inducement, publicly follow the U.S. pattern.
During the course of this operation it is quite possible that the
Castro Regime could indicate that the activities of this individual were
terminated, that the individual was captured, that he was being pur –
sued, or that he was an imaginary faker or fraud. Such action would
only serve to further publicize the actions of the individual and so long
as resistance in general continued the fame of our "Cuban Kilroy"
would spread. Humorous antics could be credited to our imaginary
friend and rumors of his exploits of bravery (ala Zoro) could be
circulated.
--
At some point in time it may be wise to indicate what this
individual stands for. (It will become obvious that he is opposed to
the Regime in Cuba.) It could be possible to indicate little-by-little
his political platform in very general terms realizing that the
mistique and the "generalness" connected with his operation is, in
fact, the power behind the operation. Ultimately, Cubans and others
may demand that he proclaim his complete political views or even
that he present himself physically. Since this is not desirable,
3
SECRET Sensitive

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_182.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET Sensitiva
-
arrangements could be made to have selected individuals meet
with his appointed representative. His instructions and words
could be relayed to the public by many means.
As his political platform becomes more apparent within
the exile groups, it may be possible to determine those willing to
follow his leadership (to gain Cuban independence under his terms)
or those who are unwilling to accept his leadership. The lines of
controversy among exiles can be drawn more clearly. Undesirable
leaders and exile groups can be eliminated from the competition
through his disavowals.
Eventually, a member of the resistance in Cuba may gain
sufficient stature to assume or to be given the title of this imaginary
leader. This, of course, will depend in large measure on individual
leadership ability and the ability to "fill the boots" of this anti-Castro
image.
While this scheme is replete with gimmickery, its imple-
mentation could be undertaken in a relatively short period of time.
Sensitivity of this scheme is such that the knowledge should be held
on the tightest basis and if implemented, those proposing should
not be informed. In the event the scheme is compromised, (unless
knowledge is widespread) there is little need for plausible deniability;
however, once used and compromised the scheme can hardly be
reinstated. A major advantage is that this image can be created
over a long period of time or developed rapidly without a political
or economic commitment on the part of the U.S. There may be a
point at which the U.S. could no longer disavow collaboration with
this imaginary person. This point, however, is so distant that
during any point in the intervening period it would be possible for
the U.S. to disengage easily without suffering embarrassment or
loss of prestige.
4
1
SECRET Sensitive

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_184.jpeg ---
13-00000
SECRET
22 May 1962
:
SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE
From:
Subject:
Lt. Colonel Patchell
Psychological Operations Group
Following is a brief "run-down" of meeting on psychological
operations at State, 21 May 1962. The meetings are normally held
each Monday at 1430. Attendees include: Bob Smith or Kermit Brown
(USIA); Seymour Bolton (CIA); Colonel Wade Robert (DOD); Harvey
Summ (Cuba Desk Officer - State); Bob Hurwitch, Dick Phillips (Public
Affairs Advisor of Martin's Bureau of Inter-American Affairs - State)
and Leon Curtis (Bureau of Intelligence and Research - State).
Subjects discussed included:
(1) Priorities of work - Cuba, Western Hemisphere, U.S.
in that order.
(2) Publication of document on conditions in Cuban Univer-
sities received from Cuban exile group (DRE) - CIA to check authenticity
and whether document is outdated.
(3) Radio SWAN CLA studying proposed changes.
(4) USIA reported three commentaries put out on Cuban
Independence Day.
(5) On the Armstrong Circle Theater, USIA states this
"hung up" for $15,000 cost of translation. It was decided in meeting to
push on to get it translated and in the meanwhile to get Miro Cardona's
speech into wide circulation.
-
(6) State suggested that speeches in Cuba (Rodriguez, Castro,
and others) within past week indicated moves away from collectivization
to free enterprise and mentioned antipathy of people to idea and name of
cooperatives. USIA to push on this and to prepare releases on it.
}
SENSITIVE
OLNOITTY
TIVE
SECRET
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_185.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
(7) CIA to declassify the Soviet nickel contract with Cuba
which exposes Soviet colonialism - for wide distribution in Latin America
through Embassies and USIA and for use by CIA in Cuba.
(8). CIA wants more stuff in the vein of ridicule, satire,
humor - to get away from invective and hit the regime and individuals
low key stuff to develop ridicule.
(9) CIA to find out from refugees what appeals best, what
they read, what they listen to, etc.
(10) USIA and CIA to play up the March USIA survey which
shows Castro's popularity in Latim America on the decline.
(11) On 26th of July, State suggested cave be used to avoid
discussing 26th of July movement as Commy - to clearly differentiate
between original 26th of July movement and its principles - and the be-
trayal. CIA requested State's guidance on policy and State's help on
providing material. State provided the attached and indicated that its use
is within policy (I have noted some particularly hard hitting stúff - if used
properly).
(12) A number of important events and dates in June and July
were discussed to include Caribbean Games, Peace Festival, Khrushchev
Rocket statement, and Castro's "Cordillera of the Andes" statement.
USIA and CIA to prepare information on these.
(13) State asked CIA to prepare a catalogue of admission of
failures of the Castro Regime, a list of production promises, and a report
of bloc people in key positions. All were asked to bring ideas into next
week's meeting to be used to exploit 26th of July to our advantage.
(14) This office will be placed on distribution of minutes of
the meetings.
N
SENSITIVE
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_188.jpeg ---
13-00000
+
DEPA
SECRET
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.
6 June 1962
SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE
From: Lt. Colonel Patchell
Subject: Psychological Operations Group
Meeting held 1430-1450 on 4 June 1962. Attended by Mr.
Hurwitch, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Summ, and Mr. Curtis (State),
Mr. Bolton (CIA), Mr. Smith (USLA), and myself. Following is
a šummary of discussion items:
(1) USIA will provide advance notice of TV programs
scheduled re Cuba.
(2) Free Cuban Group (DRE) has arranged for strong
representation at African International Student Meeting in Canada
27-28 June. They will surface copies of report on student conditions
in Cuba. They asked for no advance publicity - then big "follow up"
->
State and CIA coordinating to include preparation of releasės
to U.S. press.
(3) CIA has looked at CRC's mailing lists for various types
of info, to include the publication "Cuba Nueva." They find lists
most elaborate, complete and well organized for each purpose.
(4) USIA reports they are on top of stories pointing out
loss of rights by workers in Cuba. USIA provided sample copies of
their daily wire output and of weekly mail output for me to look at in
greater detail. (I will report separately on this.)
(5) Much exploitable info in Castro's speech on housing
corruption, unavailability etc. USIA and CIA to exploit.
--
(6) CIA reported that the Latin American edition of Time
Magazine was in English that Time Magazine in spanish was a
Latin publication (Bogota) using same format, but not useful for purpose
of exploiting Blas Roca story.
TVE
SENSITIVE
SECRET-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_186.jpeg ---
13-00000
ENS
TOP SECRET
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.
1 June 1962
SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE
From:
Subject:
Lt. Col. Patchell
Psychological Operations Group
Meeting held at 1430 hours on 28 May 62 with Mr. Hurwitch
and Mr. Simm of State, Bolton of CIA, Smith of USIA, and myself
attending. Following is a summary of subjects discussed:
(1) CIA asked State to provide a clarification of personalities
and groups to be supported - this came up in connection with a dis-
cussion of CRC and newspaper stories on its change in leadership.
(2) The Armstrong Circle Theater movie has been okayed
for Spanish language publication and distribution.
(3) On the "Eyewitness to History" program of 25 May 62
because of the type of movie USIA to look at carefully and deter-
mine whether useful for replay (I will be invited to attend).
->>
(4) CIA using theme for farmers not to produce - okayed.
(5) On declassification of Cuba
->>>
Soviet trade agreement.
CIA has been unable to obtain, but should produce soon.
->>>
(6) CIA guidance now being prepared for paych war to list :
priorities as follows: (a) Cuba, (b) Latin America, (c) rest of world.
Draft copies will be brought to next meeting for informal review.
•
(7) On the DRE publication "White Book on University Problems
in Cuba" - 2,000 copies each are being printed in Chile in English,
French, and Spanish. CIA to take action to make available in summary
form for Latin newspapers and student publications.
(8) On the CRC publication "Cuba Nueva" - presently going
only to exile community. CIA to look into getting it into Latin America
and Cuba - money appears to be no problem,
SENSITIVE
TOP-SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_189.jpeg ---
13-00000
FOR SECRET
SENSITIVE
(7) Reports of hunger strikes etc. at Isle of Pines prison
to be played up by USIA. (Berne's cable 527).
(8) Copies of cartoon books and other publications were
requested by Lt. Col. Patchell.
(9) USIA requested to provide info on the public opinion
poll conducted and schedules for future polls.
Seymour Bolton privately asked me to inform you that subject to
any comment from you, he was using the approach on psy war that
the means of delivery would not be tied to attribution. Although it
might be more convenient to work completely through the CRC, he
believed that we should reserve flexibility by organizing the "pipelines"
and then putting stuff in from CRC, or other Cuban organizations, as
well as stuff created by the U.S., with or without signatures or attri-
bution. He feels that such control would best insure that we sent in
just what was needed and no more or no less.
2
SENSITIVE
TOR SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_187.jpeg ---
13-00000
PSEGRET
SENSITIVE
"
(9) State suggested exploitation by USIA and CIA of items
appearing in the FBIS daily summary. (Housing and labor -- made
arrangements to put us on distribution.)
(10) GIA brought up the unhappy impact of Moscoso's speech
inferring that Cuba should be forgotten and that we should get on with
the Alliance For Progress. State indicated that a correction was being
made to show that Moscoso was misquoted.
(11) State suggested that Castro's 11 April speech (which was
not released until May) had many exploitable points -- corruption
failure to suggest unity - labor -- State sent to CIA for research people
to work on.
(12) Item appearing in Cuban paper concerning people who
"transgress the norm" being sent to training camps - USIA to take
action.
(13) CIA after looking at symbols etc. has about decided that
the "worm" is preferable to the "fish" and that it has been popularized
by Castro and we should take advantage of it. Both CIA and USIA will
develop further the worm idea. Lt. Col. Patchell suggested relating
it to such expressions as "the worm will turn" if applicable in Cuba
-
and associating it will biblical quotations such as "Their worm shall
not die, and their fire shall not be quenched" -- Isa 6624 or "As a moth
doth by a garment, and a worm by the wood, so the sadness of a man
consumeth the heart" - Prov. 25. 20. USIA to take action.
25.20.
COMMENT:
In the two previous meetings I have developed sufficient rapport
so that I can now get actions taken without too much question. This
next meeting I propose to introduce a system of suspense dates so that
the "we are looking into" or "we are considering" are replaced by
"we will meet the suspense" this may be difficult at first, but feel
it can be managed.
--
2
SENSITIVE
FOR SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_19.jpeg ---
13-00000
* SECRET
4. Operation DEFECTOR:
URCLASSEND
a. Objective: To induce elements or individuals of the Cuban military to
defect with equipment.
b. Concept: This activity when properly planned and implemented has the
effect of decreasing military capability. In a totalitarian system the immediate
reaction is increased security accompanied by decreased activity. It also
creates havoc in security and intelligence agencies. Could be accomplished
by intelligence means and promise of rewards.
5.
Operation BREAK-UP:
a. Objective: To clandestinely introduce corrosive materials to cause
aircraft, vehicle or boat accidents.
b. Concept: This activity, if possible should be aimed primarily toward the Sev
Soviet-provided aircraft. If properly accomplished it would degrade confidence
in the equipment, increase supply and maintenance problems and seriously
affect combat capability.
6.
Operation COVER-UP:
Objective: The objective is to convince the Communist government of
Cuba that Naval Forces ostensibly assigned to the MERCURY project is merely
a cover.
b. Concept: It should not be revealed as to what the cover is--this should
be left to conjecture. This could tie in with Operation DIRTY TRICK.
7.
Operation DIRTY TRICK:
.
a. Objective: The objective is to provide irrevocable proof that, should
the MERCURY manned orbit flight fail, the fault lies with the Communists
et al Cuba,
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by manufacturing various pieces of
evidence which would prove electronic interference on the part of the Cubans.
8.
Operation FULL-UP:
a. Objective: The objective is to destroy confidence in fuel supplied by the
Soviet Bloc by indicating it is contaminated.
2
Inch 5/2
RCLASSER
TOP SEGNET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_190.jpeg ---
A.
13-00000
:
DEPARTME
OF
NSE
DEFER
STATES
SENSITIVE
TOP SECRET
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
12 June 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE n
From:
Subject:
Lt. Col. Patchell
?
Psychological Operations Group
Meeting held 1430-1600 on 11 June 1962. Attended by Mr.
Hurwitch, Mr. Summ, and Mr. Wells (substituting for Mr. Curtis
from R&I-State); Mr. Bolton (CIA); Mr. Smith (USIA); and Lt. Col.
Patchell. Following is a summary of discussion items.
(1) CIA has translated and declassified Soviet-Cuban
Trade Agreement and passed to Mr. Hurwitch for publication and
use.
(2) Lt. Col. Patchell pointed out that the Cuban increase
of delegates to 330 to Helsinki Eighth World Youth and Student Festival
"for reasons of an imperative nature" should be acted upon and full
use made of report on student conditions which will be surfaced at the
Canadian regional meeting. Bolton assured me that action was being
taken. NOTE: After the meeting Bolton said the same group of
people were working on both and that "extensive" work was being done
on Helsinki. I asked him to be sure it was on Cubans in Helsinki
not just Helsinki.
-
(3) USIA agreed to look at clippings on Cuba with view
to broader distribution in Latin America
-- as requested by Lt. Col.
Patchell.
(4) CIA will present a document next week on guidance.
with respect to Cuba.
and when do we see?
(5) State (Mr. Summ) indicated a Cuban report indicated
that Havana was going back to horse-drawn trolleys because of motor
transport shortages. Mr. Wells added that previously horse-drawn
transport was not permitted in Havana. All to look into this for possible
exploitation.
•
SENSITIVE
THE SECRET
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_191.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOF SECRET
SENSITIVE
(6) Lt. Col. Patchell brought up comparison between
Hitler's speech after the unsuccessful Beer Hall Pustch and Castro's
"History Will Absolve Me Speech" following his abortive attempt.
CIA will look into this both for research and whether suitable for
propaganda purposes.
name
--
--
(7) Since the title "Doctor" adds some respect to Castro's
all agencies will push toward referring to him primarily as
a house the Prime Minister or secondarily as Fidel Castro. < stacking to I.A.
of more
respect.
specialists
(8) A USIA report indicated that Cuba had increased its
radio propaganda output by 60% over the past few months. USIA
stated that FBIS (Foreign Broadcast Information Service) has added
Cuba to the list of Bloc Countries, which subjects Cuba to periodic
research and analysis reports and broadcast trends. (See FBIS Report,
"Operational Developments in Foreign Broadcasting" Number 355,
dated 6 June 1962.)
--
(9) CIA reported additional people had been placed in
their research department to make content analyses on Cuba.
(10) State has received two articles from New Delhi written.
by an Indian reporter who visited Cuba in the early months of 1959 and
recently revisited Cuba. These reports are good for the "before" and
"after" content and will be publicized. State asked USIA to look for
others who visited in the early days of the Castro Regime
who might
be encouraged on a selective basis to return and make a comparison.
Is Craig aware?
Does
Naiy
have
complaint
what are
they?
-->>
(11) State indicated that Cuba had presented a series of
complaints against U.S. actions at Guantanamo and it looked as though
Cuba was building up a case against the U.S. for future use in the U.N.
or world opinion medias. State has asked Navy to provide similar
>information for use by State and will present information to the group
*for possible exploitation.
Made
12 Jumb
(12) USIA unable to report on Miro Cardona's speech in
Costa Rica. CIA reported that it had been carried in papers in Costa
Rica and had been broadcast by the Voice of America and several Miami
Spanish language stations.
5
Any mention of beeping
alive by quoting others than
(13) State suggested the next meeting be held at USIA for muro?
the purpose of briefing the group on the functioning of USIA
handling a select number of items.
2
SENSIT
ISITIVE
SECRET
10
in
lien I answered
in this
12 Jun
guf

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_195.jpeg ---
13-00000
1
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
h. The Cultural people in State are seized with problem of
Jamaican Games. I suggested other athletes for free Cuba or other
personalities. That we should at least make an inventory to see
what we have available. It is noted that Cubans are "out to win"
What is now being accomplished is not good enough.
1.1. CIA working with Navy on declassification of USSR-Cuba
Trade Agreement.
2
SENSITIVE
TOP SECRET
B

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_193.jpeg ---
13-00000
..
SELYYN AN
SECRET NOFORN
SPECIAL HANDLING
(7.) The Group was informed that Mr. Grant (St. Louis
Post-Dispatch), Tad Szulc, and a number of other newsmen
were attempting to get into Havana for the 26 July celebration.
Depending on the individual situation, these people will be
briefed and debriefed by State and, in some cases, by GIA.
(8.) State will obtain copies of reports from the British,
Italian, West German and other Allied Embassies in Havana
for distribution to members of this group.
(9.) CIA asked to have Cuban Embassy representatives in
other Latin American states confronted with Castro promises
and asked for comment for publication refusals and "no com-
ments" to be publicised.
(10.) USIA reported that Cardenas incident played two times
Saturday evening and four times Sunday over VOA.
TV
(11.). USIA provided film on Carpenter flight for use on TV
at Guantanamo.
:
N
SENSITIVE
LOT SEGRET NOFORN
SPECIAL HANDLING

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_194.jpeg ---
13-00000
DEPARTM
NOT SECRET
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
B
SLONČARÉ
_
SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE
From: Lt. Col. Patchell
Subject: Psychological Operations Group
26 June 1962
Meeting held at 1430 on 25 June 1962 was attended by Mr. Hurwitch
(State). Mr. Robert Follestad (substituting for Harvey Summ-State),
Bob Smith (USIA), John Tilton (substituting for Seymour Bolten-CIA),
and Lt. Col. Patchell. Following items discussed:
a. State to seek anti-Castro press clippings from other Latin
American countries for replay.
b. USIA is distributing confidential memorandum, "The Impact
of Castro on Mexican Public Opinion and Some Indications of Attitudes
Toward the U.S. and the USSR" (LA-3, Feb 62). This report, although
dated Feb 62, is just now coming out it reportedly shows a significant
decrease of Castro popularity in Mexico.
c. CIA was asked whether the reports of Cuban communist
interference with other Latin communist parties could be exploited.
d. Decided to direct propaganda into Cuba which is designed to
destroy the image of Cuban success throughout the hemisphere. Also to
direct propaganda designed to stress that Cuba is being "used", by the USSR.
e. State pointed out the value of President's trip to Mexico this
week end to point up US-Mexico solidarity. (Noted that Hurwitch withdrew
considerably from his initial position - Cuba not mentioned as a point of
solidarity).
f. CIA is translating Theodore Draper's book into Spanish for
dissemination as a paper-back in Latin America.
g
Decided to play back into Cuba administrative "goofs" by
Cubans on transportation arrangements for youths of other Latin countries
to celebrations. (Some left penniless and stranded in Caribbean).
SENSITIVI
TOP SECRET
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_192.jpeg ---
13-00000
WART!
( ) [
BEFENSE
SECRET-NOFORN
SPECIAL HANDLING
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
18 June 1962
SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDAJ
From: Lt. Col. Patchell
Subject: Psychological Operations Group
The meeting held 1430-1600 on 18 June was attended by Mr.
Hurwitch, Mr. Bart Wells, Mr. Summ, and Mr. Phillips (State),
Mr. Bolton (CIA), Mr. Bob Smith (USIA), and Lt. Col Patchell,
Following are items of interest.
:
(1.) CIA distributed copies of a student booklet (English and
French versions attached). Thirty-thousand copies were printed
in Spanish, French, English, and Portuguese in Chile -- sponsored
by a Latin American student organization, and primarily for Latin
audiences. The booklets will be used on tour of Latins in Afrilia
and were distributed throughout Latin America and at international
youth and student meetings in Quebec and Helsinki. Some coples
will be mailed into Cuba.
(2.) CIA presented draft guidelines for overseas posts re
Cuba. The group made some minor changes. The guidelines are PRIMARILY
26 July.
FOR USE
(3.) State will put out a similar circular to its posts, and USIA
will consider doing the same.
(4.) Roundup reports of overseas stations on actions are due
within 7 days after 26 July. They are to cable significant actions
immediately.
(5.). Hurwitch distributed copies of a draft cable intended to
exploit Cardenas incident (copy attached).
(6.) Lt. Col. Patchell asked full exploitation of Mexican
defector -- suggesting äppearance before OAS Committee, trip
through Latin America, etc.
SENSITIVE
SECRET NOFORN
SPECIAL HANDLING
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200,10
DOES NOT APPLY.
This document contains 2 pages.
Copy No. 2 of 2 copies. Series

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_197.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
up to cross-examination under OAS. State stressed need to
expedite in order to gain impact. CIA can provide.no estimate
of time when assessment will be completed. In Miami, his press
conference indicated Castro control of the Mexican provincial police.
->
h. On question of intervention - Mexican papers stating
this is Mexican victory, on Cuban issue this is being replayed by
U.S. papers
leaves a poor impression. State said this is being
discussed with President and will be covered by Lincoln White at
·press.conference today. CIA and USIA agreed that more should be
done. State could not answer on Cuban talks. - unknown, how deeply
Cuba was covered and whether the question of diversion of U.S.
good or movement of people were discussed. Any hint of Mexican
victory will be demoralizing to people in Cuba - exile community -
and Latin America in general.
i. Following the meeting Mr. Hurwitch indicated that
State and CIA representatives would meet with CAB officials con-
cerning.PAA flights to Havana.
N
SENSITIVE
TOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_199.jpeg ---
13-00000
!
TOR SECRET NOEORN
SPECIAL HANDLING
British Newsman. Will meet with State representatives. at
1430 on 11 July. Others invited. This individual was formerly
a Communist.
Chinese Opium Technicians. On report of Chinese techni-
cians to assist Cubans in opium growing. Lt. Col. Patchell'sug-
gested CIA get declassified and publicized as quickly as possible.
Overall Evaluation. All to take a look at orientation of group
its purpose, missions, methods of carrying out tasks to see what
changes are required for period starting 1 August 1962, or after
new NIE is published.
Note: From the time that I joined the group on 21 May, the
group's orientation has changed from a general Latin American
psychological operations group to one focused on Cuba. My own
personal objective is now to get the output extended beyond Latin
America into NATO, the uncommitted areas, eastern Europe,
Japan, etc.
->
x
Visit of James B. Donovan. Following the meeting, Mr.
Hurwitch gave me the attached memorandum of conversation with
Mr. Donovan.
Capy sent to w
W Ha
• Harvey 16 July 62
2
SECRET NOFORN
SPECIAL HANDLING

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_196.jpeg ---
13-00000
*
_
DEPARTAT
DEFENSE
SECRET
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
SENSITIVE
3 July 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE
From: .Lt. Col. Patchell
gug
Subject: Psychological Operations Group
(has seen)
Meeting held from 1100.to. 1300. on 3 July 1962 with the
following in attendance: Bob Smith (USIA), Seymour Bolten (CIA),
Bob Hurwitch, Bob Fallestad, AL Carter, and Bart Wells (State)
and Lt. Col. Patchell. Following are highlights of discussion.
a. State is providing copies of report from British
Ambassador to Cuba MARCHAND. Report made after absence
3 months from his post in Cuba. Copyzattached-re Hedlined
b. State has received letters explaining details of
Cardenas incident.- passed to CIA and USIA for action.
Portions
C. CIA to obtain more information on outbreak in ALCANO
which is being suppressed by Cuba.
-
d. CIA provided copies of study on promises and failures
of Castro regime it has been distributed to CIA stations overseas.
State and USLA to look at with view to providing copies to internațional
organizations and State and USIA representatives overseas. Cop.fattuda
In view of uncertainty expressed in messages from
Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and UAR about stability of
Cuban economy and attempts to collect funds to assist Cuba - CIA
to play on theme of Cuba as poor investment etc. behind iron curtain.
f. Defector who was formerly, Cuban.economic attache in
Moscow being debriefed - he was held for 16 months in Argentine
Embassy in Havana and for this reason much of his information is
dated. CIA to expedite his assessment.
--
still being
g. On Cuban economic defector from Mexico
interrogated and assessed with view to looking at his ability to stand
SENSITIVE
TOP SECRET
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
AL

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_198.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
DEPART
LA SECRET NOFORN
SPECIAL HANDLING
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D. C..
fur Hand int
itcol Patchell-
EL
SENSITIVE
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL LANSDALE
From:
Subject:
Lt. Col. Patchell
88.
Psychological Operations Group
11 July 1962
Following is brief of meeting held from 1430-1530 on 9 July 62
with the following in attendance: Robert Hurwitch, Harvey Summ,
Juan Gurrell, and Al Carter (State), Bob Smith (USIA), John Tilton
(CIA),˜and Lt. Col. Patchell.
Swiss article.
A Swiss publication has a very fine article in
detail on Cuba - by Swiss reporter who spent several months in
Cuba - USIA to replay.
Clipping service. Good immediate reaction to clipping service
being provided..
26th of July. Group agreed to "jack up" machinery for informa-
tion on activities and L. A. reaction to 26th of July.
CRC Political Platform. State provided members with copies
of a CRC political platform (attached). Little publicity has been
attached to document. CIA will check to see if it is a document
for internal or external distribution. (Note: Following the meeting,
I asked Mr. Hurwitch to consider this in connection with his guide-
lines paper, depending upon its validity and usefulness. He stated
he believed the two were in consonance, but would check:)
Cuban Protests. Discussion of Cuban protests. Believed that
the publication of protests may be leading up to justification for
receipt of defensive weapons. (Note: This fits in with Mr. Bill
Harvey's earlier remarks on the same general subject.) State is
responding to protests and queries in low key. :
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
SECRET N
SPECIAL HANDLING
This document contains
Copy No.
of
pages.
copies. Series

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_2.jpeg ---
13-00000
Messrs. Aly and Moore
June 9, 1997
Page 2
Preliminary Review of Califano Papers
The Review Board staff has conducted an initial review of the records and has
tentatively reached the following conclusions: first, the records are very similar in
subject manner to many other records that already are a part of the JFK Collection;
second, although the vast majority of the records technically remain classified, there is
little remaining sensitivity due to the passage of time and to the release of much of the
information in other contexts; and third, the Califano papers contain equities of
numerous military and non-military agencies, which, under the standard referral
process, would be very difficult and time-consuming.² Thus, the logistical problem in
declassifying the records is not the continued sensitivity of the records, but the number
of agencies that will need to review their own equities in the records. For this reason,
and for the short time-line on which we are now operating, we believe that there is an
urgent need to make acceptable arrangements for the review and referral of records.
Proposal
In order to expedite the process and make it more efficient, we would like to propose an
alternate arrangement for declassification of records that we previously have found
effective. We suggest the holding of a multi-agency concurrent review of the Califano
papers. We would like to schedule a single session at our offices, on or before July 23,
1997, where all agencies with equities in the Califano papers be concurrently present for
a declassification review. At such a session, agencies would be able to review their own
equities in the records, declassify them, and simply hand them across the table to other
agencies for their review. It has been our own experience that sessions of this sort
greatly simply the review process by giving agencies the opportunity to speak with
each other and quickly to resolve questions.
Because the Califano papers will need to be reviewed by the Board at its August 5-6
meeting, we believe that an arrangement such as is proposed above will provide all
agencies with a full opportunity to identify their equities in the records and to make
determinations regarding the need for continued classification. If the Army and the
'Ms. Toni Bowie, of the Army Declassification Activity, spent three days
reviewing some of the records and making recommendations for referrals to other
agencies both within and outside of the military. Although Ms. Bowie worked
energetically for three days, it was our sense afterwards that, if we continue at the same
pace, the agencies with equities will likely not be able to complete their reviews before
the August deadline arrives.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_21.jpeg ---
13-00000
.
!
MEAN A
(g) Resupply and replacement activities.
Properly executed, the above could overthrow the Cuban Government in a
matter of hours, providing the plan is implemented within the next six months.
11. Operation GOOD TIMES:
a. Objective: To disillusion the Cuban population with Castro image by
distribution of fake photographic material.
-
b. Concept: Prepare a desired photograph, such as an obese Castro
with two beauties in any situation desired, ostensibly within a room in the
Castro residence, lavishly furnished, and a table briming over with the most
delectable Cuban food with an underlying caption (appropriately Cuban) such as
!!My ration is different." Make as many prints as desired on sterile paper and
then distribute over the countryside by air drops or agents. This should put
even a Commie Dictator in the proper perspective with the underprivileged
masses.
12. Operation HEAT IS ON:
a. Objective: To create the impression with Castro Government that
certain dyed-in-the-wool Red pilots are planning to defect, thus causing a
detrimental tightening of security.
b. Concept: It is known that many Cuban refugee pilots are personally
acquainted with many of the present CRAF pilots. Accordingly, by utilizing
all sources available, determine by name those pilots considered to be dedicated
Castro Reds. Then by use of agents, communications, etc. inject into the
Castro intelligence system the fact that these pre-designated Reds are planning
to defect for monetary and/or ideological reasons. Security crackdown should
help destroy Castro image and also impose unacceptable restrictions on
routine training activities.
4
Inel 5/4
PAR SEGRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_20.jpeg ---
13-00000
TDP-SECRET
G
:
1 T.
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by introducing a known biological
agent into jet fuel storage facilities. This agent flourishes in jet fuel and
grows until it consumes all the space inside the tank.
9.
Operation PHANTOM:
a. Objective: The objective is to convince the Castro Government that
clandestine penetration and resupply of agents is being regularly conducted.
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by use of BJ, UDT, AND JJ capa.
bilities to create the impression that landings have been made on beaches
and air drops have been made in other areas.
10.
Operation BINGO:
a. Objective: The objective is to create an incident which has the appearance.....
of an attack on U.S. facilities (GMO) in Cuba, thus providing the excuse for
use of U.S. military might to overthrow the current government of Cuba.
b. Concept: This to be accomplished by the use of SNAKES outside the
confines of the Guantanamo Base. SNAKES simulate an actual fire-fight and
upon hearing such a sound it is entirely feasible that the immediate reaction
on G'Mo would be that the base is being attacked. This would, with proper
preparation, be followed by a counterattack and with adequate planning the base
at G'Mo could disgorge military force in sufficient number to sustain itself
until other forces, which had been previously alerted, could attack in other
areas. It is envisaged that a schedule of operations similar to the following
would overwhelm the Cuban military and cause its defeat:
(1) Simulated attack on Guantanamo.
(2) Word flashed to the President..
(3) President orders counterattack to include:
(a) Immediate launch of alerted aircraft whose targets are Cuban airfields.
(b) Immediate launch of counterattack down strategic lines in communi-
cation in Cuba.
(c) Fleet force standing by on alert would make way toward pre-selected
targets/landing areas.
(d) Immediate embarkation of airborne troops previously alerted to
pre-selected targets.
(e) Launch of additional combat aircraft to clear drop areas and
further interdict lines of communication.
(f) Ships and aircraft would land/airdrop troops and secure airfields,
road/rail terminals, etc.
3
Indl 5/3
.3.
SEGNE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_23.jpeg ---
13-00000
For SEGME!
ot H
Operation "HORN SWOGGLE"
Objective:
1. To crash or force down Cuban MIG aircraft with an all weather
intercept capability by communications intrusion.
Concept of Operations:
2. Closely monitor MIG air/ground communications for the purpose
of determining frequency and terminology usage for practice or real GCI
operations.
-
3. By use of overriding transmitters and either a decoy aircraft or
solid weather conditions, override Cuban.controller and have Cuban refugee
pilot issue instructions: which tun MIG out of fuel or towards Florida,
Puerto Rico, Jamaica, a carrier, etc.
UNCLASSIFIED
eproduction of this document in whole
or in part is prohibited except with
permission of the issuing office.
Special Handling of this paper is requested.
Access should be limited to
viduals requiring
the information herein in cider to their
official duties.
Ind 3
This document consists of
Copy # 1 of
___
_
3 copys.
_ pages-
-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_24.jpeg ---
13-00000
S
Operation TRUE BLUE
1. Objective: To degrade Castro and his government in the eyes of the
Cuban people by communications intrusion.
Concept of Operations:
2. By utilizing high powered transmitters in the vicinity of Cuba
(Florida, Inagwa, Jamaica, aboard Naval ship) which have the capability of
overriding commercial Cuban radio and TV stations, periodically degrade
Castro and other government figures in the minds of the Cuban people.
3. The technique of communications intrusion could be exploited by pre-
taping or live broadcasts of anti-communist and anti-Castro propaganda at
station breaks, Castro speeches, etc. This idea envisions the use of a
Cuban refugee to make such broadcasts and naturally would require close
monitoring of stations to be worked. Any number of thoughts could be
injected such as:
a.
"Cuba Si, Russia No."
b. Communism exploits the masses.
Communism is ruthless totalitarianism.
Castro and henchment feast off the land while we are rationed.
Castro and his reign of terror.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Castro is a lunatic and should be put away.
g.
Castro is the cause of all our troubles.
h. Rise up against the pig Castro, etc. etc.
4. If approved this operation could become a continuous project, perhaps
under control of USIA.
Special Handling of this paper is requested.
Access should be limited to individuals requiring
the information herein in or to carry their
official duties.
production of this document in whole
r in part is prohibited onsepi with
permission of the issuing office.
Zech 2
This document consist of
pages.
Copy # ✓ of 3 copys.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_22.jpeg ---
13-00000
F
KM.
i
OLORET
C
OPERATION: Invisible Bomb
OBJECTIVE:
1. To create the impression that isolated bombings are taking place
in Cuba thus maximizing harrassment and confusion of the Castro govern-
ment.
CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS:
2. The Air Force can utilize the operational characteristics of F-101
or other Century series aircraft to create the impression that anti-Castro
opposition is continuing. The aircraft operational characteristic to be
exploited is the "sonic-boom."
...
3. The "sonic-boom" can be employed in several different ways such
as an individual boom at selected spots or a continuous boom and performed
at either high or low altitudes. It will cause not only apprehension but
varying degrees of malicious damage as well, i. e. break all the windows
on a street in Havana.
4. The "sonic-hoom" effect can be maximized by planning missions
for execution during the early morning hours when the populace is sleeping.
The Cuban people are generally unfamiliar with this phenomenon, therefore
it is felt that the impact for a time would be most beneficial.
5. The directional aspects of the "sonic-boom" also make it feasible
for use in simulating U.S. Naval gun-fire in the immediate vicinity of the
Cuban land mass.
6. This operation is considered relatively safe and leaves no tangible
evidence. It can be planned and executed with a minimum of effort and
expense.
Special Handling of this paper is requested.
Access should be limited to individuals requiring
the information herein. in order to carry cut their
official duties.
sproduction of this document in whole
or in part is prohibited except with
permission of the issuing office.
Inch 6
i
This document consists of
pages.
CAD
Copy # ____ of
3 copys.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_26.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
C
Operation "NO LOVE LOST"
1. Objective: To confuse and harrass Castro Cuban Pilots by use of
radio conversations.
2. Concept of Operations: Fly Cuban refugee pilot in sterile aircraft
in proximity of Cuba at periodic intervals while communication monitoring
Cuban air/ground frequencies utilized for airdrome control. Cuban refugee
pilot in sterile aircraft would personally know many of the pilots still flying
for Castro. Refugee pilot would get into argument with Castro pilots over
radio thus distracting confusing, etc. Would be real trouble for Castro
pilots in actual weather conditions. Argument could go, "I'll get you you
Red son-of-a-gun, " and call by name if appropriate.
Reproduction of this day
or in par
persissies of
Jual H
Athele
UROLESIRE
and
...
Special Handling of this paver is requested.
Access should be limited to as requiring
the information herein in order to carry out their
official duties.
This document consists of
Pages.
Copy # 1 of
+
3

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_25.jpeg ---
13-00000
DEPART
OP
TTY JECKEY SPECIAL HANDLING
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
2D STATES OF AMERICA.
☐☐☐
2 February 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, USAF,
Assistant to the Secretary of Defense
Subject: Ideas in Support of Project
The enclosed ideas are submitted for your consideration and
possible use in furtherance of the objectives of the Cuba
Project. I think some of them have promise and should you
desire our group to develop any of them in more detail, we
will do so.
6 encls
1.
2.
iamtin 6
4.
5.
WILLIAM H. CRAIG
Brigadier General USA
DOD Representative
Caribbean Survey Group
Operation Smasher (2Pages) (TS)
Operation True Blue(1Page) (TS)
3. Operation "Horn Swoggle" (1Page)(TS)
Operation "No Love Lost" (1Page). (TS)
Possible Actions to Provide, Harrass, or
disrupt (4Pages) (TS)
6. Operation Invisible Bomb (1Page) (TS)
TOP SECRET
SPECIAL HANDLING
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
CSGWG O#19

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_27.jpeg ---
13-00000
wants
1. %.
.
"JEGNET
UNCLASSI
I. Operation SMASHER.
1. Objective: Disrupt or disable military and commercial communications
facilities in Cuba.
2. Technical Requirements:
Detailed information on both commercial and military communi-
cations facilities and capabilities, to include inside and outside plant
construction, system networks, equipment details (i. e. circuitry, tubes, etc.)
location and type of repeator stations. This information is required to
construct a refined device.
b. A vacuum tube modified in such a manner as to cause a short
circuit. This is possible by inducing silicon carbide (?) into the base of the
tube. When the tube becomes hot the silicon carbide liquifies and becomes
a conductor; when the tube cools the matter returns to a solid non-conductive
state. Such a device (vacuum tube) is available.
3. Targets:
a. Cuban Telephone Company. The company provides local and long
distance telephone service throughout Cuba and also international telephone
service.
b. Radio Corporation of Cuba Avenida Carlos. The company provides
radiotelephone service to American and European countries. It also provides
radiotelegraph service and includes leased teleprinter channels. In conjunc-
tion with AT&T the company inaugurated over-the-horizon microwave radio
service between Cuba and Florida in 1957. This latter made available two-way
TV channels.
c. Cuban American Telephone and Telegraph Company. Founded by
IT&T and AT&T, providing six (6) submarine cables linking Havana and Key
West. Facility operates in conjunction with microwave link.
d. Commercial Radio and Television Stations.
e. Military Radio and Land-line Facilities. These include point-to-
point command and administrative systems, air/ground facilities, navigational
aids. Obviously certain commercial facilities provide service to the military
therefore disrupting or disabling commercial facilities will affect military
communications capabilities. Special Handling of this paper is requested.
'production of this document in whole
r in part is prohibited except with
permission of the issuing office.
Ind #1/1
Access should be limited to individuals requiring
the information herein in order to carry out their
official duties.
531)
This document consists of
2
pages.
Copy # ✓ c² 3

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_28.jpeg ---
13-00000
OLONCT
4. Concept of Operation:
equipments.
The tube must be introduced clandestinely into appropriate
b. Introduction can be accomplished through the use of known assets
either directly or by contact with an employee of a company who would have
access and who would receive proper remuneration.
.2
zie 1/2
Inel 1/2
:
'

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_3.jpeg ---
13-00000
Messrs. Aly and Moore
June 9, 1997
Page 3
Department of Defense are agreeable to such an arrangement, the Review Board will
take the responsibility for contacting all non-military agencies with equities in the
records while Army and DoD make arrangements for all appropriate military entities to
be present.
We are, of course, very willing to consider other ideas or suggestions that you might
have. However, because the clock is ticking, it is important that we promptly develop a
plan that will provide all agencies with equities in the Califano papers to have an
opportunity to review and declassify their equities.
I look forward to discussing this issue with you.
1
Sincerely,
T. Jeremy Gunn
General Counsel
Attachment
CC:
Steven D. Tilley, NARA
J. Barry Harrelson, CIA
Nina Noring, State
Richard S. Werksman, USIA
William Leary, NSC
Carol Keeley, FBI

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_30.jpeg ---
13-00000
62
SRO
JCS 1969/303
7 February 1962
UNCLASSIFIED
COPY NO.
. SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION
i
:
Page 2144
NOTE BY THE SECRETARIES
to the
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
on
NORTHWOODS (s)
A report* on the above subject is submitted for considera-
tion by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
F. J. BLOUIN
M. J. INGELIDO
Joint Secretariat
* Not reproduced; on file in Joint Secretariat
EXCLUDED FROM GD3
SRORI
JCS 1969/303
2144
UNCLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_29.jpeg ---
13-00000
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : JCS
RECORD NUMBER : 202-10002-10104
RECORDS SERIES : JCS CENTRAL FILES 1962
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 3360 (7 FEB 62)
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
Cuba Selected Documents
ORIGINATOR : JCS
FROM:
TO :
TITLE : NORTHWOODS
DATE : 00/00/62
PAGES: 197
SUBJECTS: U. S. MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA
CONTINGENCY PLANNING, CUBA
OPERATION MONGOOSE
UPRISINGS IN CUBA
COVERT OPERATIONS,
CUBA
SOVIET BASE IN CUBA
CARIBBEAN SECURITY
PATROL POSTS
INVASION OF CUBA
#2
JUSTIFICATION FOR U: S. MILITARY INTERVENTION
1
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: 1C
CURRENT STATUS: RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
ATE OF LAST REVIEW : 10/07/97
OPENING CRITERIA:
COMMENTS : JCS Central Files 1962, Box 29. JCS Record Case, Code
Name Northwoods, containing JCS Papers related to JCS
recommendation to invade Cuba and
US military intervention.
pretexts to justify
[R]
-
ITEM IS RESTRICTED

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_31.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
SPECIAL HANDLING REQUIRED
NOFORN
LIMITED DISTRIBUTION
APPENDIX 1 TO ENCLOSURE A
DRAFT
MEMORANDUM FOR BRIGADIER GENERAL E. G. LANSDALE,
Chief of Operations, Cuba Project
Subject: Cuba Project:
Reference:
i
Memorandum from Your Office for
BrigGen W. H. Craig, USA, subj:
'Special Project", dated 17 Jan 62
· 1. As requested in referenced memorandum, the position of
the Department of Defense, with respect to the military stake
and role in the removal of the Communist regime in Cuba, has
been determined based upon the following factors:
2. National Security Policy, determined by the NSC during
routing of 9 May 1961.
b. Current intelligence estimates of the situation in
Cuba.'
d. Operations against the Castro regime will be covert,
at least initially.
d. Time favors the Castro government.
2. The basic military implications of Castro's Communist
governments are as follows:
a. It exposes the Western Hemisphere to an increasingly
serious threat to its security. This increases our national
vulnerability and defense costs as forces are developed.
costs
or shifted to meet this threat.
b. It provides the Soviet Union with the most effective
base they have ever had for spreading Communism throughout
the Western Hemisphere. This in turn greatly increases the
possibility that additional Latin American countries will
come under Communist control. Elimination of this base would
demonstrate to the other nations of the world that the United
States will not tolerate such intrusions. Communist
control of additional countries would or could result in:
SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED
Appendix 1 to
Enclosure A
SPECIAL HANDLING REQUIRED
NORFORN
LIMITED DISTRIBUTORET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_34.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
JCS 1969/321
12 March 1962
Page 2165
UNCLASSIFIED
COPY NÓ.
SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION
NOTE BY THE SECRETARIES
to the
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
on
NORTHWOODS (s)
A report* on the above subject is submitted for consider-
ation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
F. J. BLOUIN
M. J. INGELIDO
Joint Secretariat
* Not reproduced herewith; on file in Joint Secretariat
EXCLUDED FROM GDS
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING; DOD DIRECTIVE
5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
TOT DECID
JCS 1969/321
2165
UNCLASSIFIED
OECRES 25

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_33.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP
i
UNCLASSIFIED
SPECIAL HANDLING REQUIRED
NOFORN
LINTERD DISTRIBUTION
a. If the impression is created that there is an urgent,
humanitarian requirement to restore order in Cuba and/or the
United States is responding to an appeal for assistance from
a government
"
representative of the Cuban people.
it is announced incident to the overt military
action that the United States and/or members of the OAS are
moving into Cuba for the purpose of restoring order and holding:
free elections, and that they will immediately withdraw as soon:
as the new government advises that they have the capability
to maintain order without further assistance from the OAS
nations.
0. If the military operation is conducted as quickly
as possible and with sufficient force to that the Communist
Bloc's ability to take effective counter-measures in support
of the Castro regine is reduced to a minimum.
c. Or, if the Cuban regime commits hostile acts against
US forces or property which would serve as an incident upon
which to base overt US intervention. In this event, applicable.
portions of a, b, and c above apply.
5. The Department of Defense is also prepared to covertly
provide support to CIA or State, or any US approved popular
movement inside Cuba, in terms of supplies, transportation,
personnel and bases.
UNCLASSIFIED
3
Appendix 1 to
Enclosure A
SPECIAL HANDLING REQUIRED
NOFORN
LIMITED DISTRIBUTION
SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_35.jpeg ---
13-00000
sare
SEGREE SPECIAL HANDLING
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON 15, D.C.
NOFODN
UNCLASSIFIED
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
Subject:
13 March 1962
Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)
1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the attached
Memorandum for the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, which
responds to a request of that office for brief but precise
description of pretexts which would provide justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.
2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the
proposed memorandum be forwarded as a preliminary submission
suitable for planning purposes. It is assumed that there
will be similar submissions from other agencies and that
these inputs will be used as a basis for developing a
time-phased plan. Individual projects can then be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
3. Further, it is assumed that a single agency will be
given the primary responsibility for developing military
and para-military aspects of the basic plan. It is
recommended that this responsibility for both overt and
covert military operations be assigned the Joint Chiefs of
○ Staff.
SYSTEMATICALLY REVIEWED
BY JCS ON
May 24
CLASSIFICATION CONTINUED
1 Enclosure
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L.L...
L. L. LEMNITZER
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Memo for Chief of Operations, Cuba Project
EXCLUDED FROM GDS
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING: DOD DIB 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
FOR SECRET SPECIAL I
■ NOTOD AL
UNCLASSIFIED
i

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_32.jpeg ---
13-00000
.
-
HARVLIVE
nuruk
UNCLASSIFIED
[ (1) Increased Communist capability for attach
other nations of the Western Hemisphere.
(2) Increased Communist capability for spreading
Communism throughout Latin America.
(3) The loss of existing and/or potential bases,
training areas, facilities and rights, as well as sources
of strategic materials necessary to our military
capability.
(4) An increased threat to US usage and control
of the Panama Canal through subversion and sabotage.
3. The urgency of the requirement to remove the Communist
government from Cuba is made apparent by Castro's constantly
increasing capabilities for attacking other nations of the
Western Hemisphere and for spreading Communism throughout the
hemisphere. This sense of urgency is greatly increased if
courses of action within the capability of the Communists
are considered:
a. The Soviets could establish land, sea and/or air
bases in Cuba.`
b. The Soviets could provide Castro with a number of
ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads; or they could
furnish the missiles and maintain joint control of the
nuclear warheads.
4. In view of the factors set forth above, the Department of
Defense holds that the Communist regime in Cuba is incompatible
with the minimum security requirements of the Western
Hemisphere. The Department of Defense is prepared to overtly'
support any popular movement inside Cuba to the extent of
ousting the Communist regime and installing a government
acceptable to the United States. While the possibility of
Communist Bloc reactions in areas other than in Cuba is
recognized, it is believed that this can be accomplished without
precipitating general war, and without serious effect on
world public opinion if the following conditions prevail:
UNCLASSIFIED"
Appendix 1 to
Enclosure A
TOP SECRET
SPECIAL HANDLING

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_36.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
Re
JR 1969/333"
TOP
N
NUFORN
CIAL HANDLING
JCSM-272-62
10 April 1962
MEMORANDUM FÖR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
Subject: Cuba
5:
1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the Cuban
problem must be solved in the near future. Further, they
see no prospect of early success in overthrowing the present
communist regime either as a result of internal uprisings
or external political, economic or psychological pressures.
Accordingly they believe that military intervention by the
United States will be required to overthrow the present
communist regime.
2. The United States cannot tolerate permanent existence
of a communist government in the Western Hemisphere. The
present regime in Cuba provides communism with a base of
operations for espionage, sabotage and subversion against
Latin America. The stability of some governments in Latin
America is already threatened by the overt and covert actions
of the Cuban government. Continued existence of this com
munist government increases the probability that one or
more other nations in Latin America will become communist
or communist dominated. This will greatly increase the
problems currently facing the United States and the Organiza-
tion of American States. While considered unlikely, it is
possible for the Sino-Soviet mos to establish military
bases in Cuba similar to US installations around the bloo
periphery. Establishment of such bases would increase US
defense. costs as forces were developed or shifted to meet
the threat.
3. Time favors the Cuban regime and the communist bloo.
They are provided with the opportunity to continue with
their subversive efforts in Latin America. Increasing
internal security measures by police state methods decrease
TOP SECRET MOGODAL
[SPECIAL HANDLING
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING; DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
EXCLUDED FROM GDS
SYSTEMATICALLY
CEVIEWED
BY JCS ON ☑
CLASSIFICATION CONTINUED
UNCLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_37.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
TOP SECRE
--
:
OWN
ANULING
;
UNCLASSIFIED
the possibility of internal uprisings within Cuba. The
steady: improvement in military defenses strengthens the
resistance which must be overcome in the event of US
military intervention and could lengthen the time required.
to secure control of the government and the island. The
continuing indoctrination of the Cuban youth creates a
growing mucleus for a communist underground after the
elimination of the present government. This creates a
problem for the future which is steadily increasing in.
magnitude.
4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the United
States can undertake military intervention in Cuba without
risk of general war. They also believe that the intervention
can be accomplished rapidly enough to minimize communist
opportunities for solicitation of UN action. Forces
available would assure rapid essential military control of
Cuba. Continued police action would be required.
5. In view of the increasing military and subversive
threat to the United States and the nations of the Western
Hemisphere posed by the communist regime in Cuba, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff recommend that a national policy of early
military intervention in Cuba be adopted by the United
States. They also recommend that such intervention be
undertaken as soon as possible and preferably before the
release of National Chard and Reserve forces presently
on active duty.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
TOP SECHET.
SPEC HANDLING
}
L. L. LEMNITZER
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
2
UNCLASSIFIED
-->

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_38.jpeg ---
13-00000
9 March 1962
VI LUIAL
UNCLASSIFIED
OF
COPY
COPIES
SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION
REPORT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF REPRESENTATIVE ON THE
CARIBBEAN SURVEY GROUP
to the
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
on
CUBA PROJECT (TS)
The Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, has requested
that he be furnished the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
on this matter by 13 March 1962.
i
:
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
1
EXCLUDED FROM GDS
NAFARN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_39.jpeg ---
42 SOKA T
13-00000
♥MWALIOFEGIAL MANULIK NOFORN
UNCLASSIFIED
JUSTIFICATION FOR US MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA (TS)
THE PROBLEM
·
1. As requested" by Chief of Operations, Cuba Project; the
Joint Chiefs of Staff are to indicate brief but precise.
description of pretexts which they consider would providė
Justification for US military intervention in Cuba.
:
FACTS HEARING ON THE PROBLEM
2. It is recognized that any action which becomes pretext
for US military intervention in Cuba will lead to a political
decision which then would lead to military action.
3. Cognizande has been taken of a suggested course of
action proposed by the US Navy relating to generated
instances in the Quantanamo area.
4. For additional facts see Enclosure B.
DISCUSSION
.5. The suggested courses of action appended to Enclosure A
are based on the premise that US military intervention will
result from a period of heightened US-Cuban tensions which
place the United States in the position of suffering justif-
iable grievances. World opinion, and the United Nations
forum should be favorably affected by developing the inter-
national image of the Cuban government as rash and irresponsible,
and as an alarming and unpredictable threat to the peace of
the Western Hemisphere.
6. While the foregoing premise can be utilized at the
present time it will continue to hold good only as long as
there can be reasonable certainty that US military intervention
in Cuba would not directly involve the Soviet Union. There is
Memorandum for General Craig from Chief of Operations,'
Cuba Project, subject: "Operation MONGOOSE", dated
5 March 1962, on file in General Craig's office.
** Memorandum for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, from
Chief of Naval Operations, subject: "Instances to
Provoke Military Actions in Cuba (TS)", dated 8 March 1962,
on file in General Craig's office.
2
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NAFARN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_4.jpeg ---
13-00000
JOSEPH CALIFANO PAPERS (6 boxes)
Identified by Steve Tilley at NARA, these 6 boxes of papers, almost exclusively from
1962-63, were either generated by, or addressed to Joseph Califano, who at this time
was Department of the Army General Counsel and Special Assistant to the Secretary of
the Army. Most of the documents are short summaries of proposed policy positions, or
letters of transmittal, with voluminous appendices attached. Each of the 6 boxes
contains approximately 1500-2000 pages of material.
Representative Topics:
(1) ICCCA (Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairs-the
"Cottrell Committee”) meetings on future U.S. policy toward Cuba. These
- documents are generally background papers prepared prior to meetings,
minutes of meetings, or follow-on discussion of action items assigned at
meetings of the ICCCA.
(2)
Contingency plans for Cuban invasion by the U.S. military in the event of
a Cuban uprising.
Psychological warfare against Cuba.
(3)
(4)
Diplomatic initiatives intended to increase isolation of Cuba.
(5)
Biographies, and evaluations of Cuban exile leaders.
(6)
Intelligence reports and estimates on reported events inside Cuba.
(7)
Summaries of clandestine paramilitary actions taken against Cuba, and
suggestions for possible future actions.
Apparent Equities:
Ninety-five per cent of the documents appear to have multiple-agency equities,
usually 4 to 6 agencies per document. Based upon staff review, it is estimated
that 80% of the documents have State equities, 60% Joint Staff or OSD, 60% NSC,
60% CIA, 15% Army, Navy or Air Force, perhaps 10% DIA, and a small
percentage of USIA, Justice, Treasury and FBI.
Horne e:\wp-docs\Califano.wpd
File: 4.0.4

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_40.jpeg ---
13-00000
*SUBOT 1999*
i
:
"UNCLASSIFIED
NUTUKN
as yet no bilateral mutual support agreement binding the USSR
to the defense of Cuba, Cuba has not yet become a member of the
Warsaw Pact, nor have the Soviets established Soviet bases
in Cuba in the pattern of US bases in Western Europe. Therefore,
since time appears to be an important factor in resolution of
the Cuba problem, all projects are suggested within the time
frame of the next few months.
CONCLUSION
7. The suggested courses of action appended to Enclosure A
satisfactorily respond to the statement of the problem. However,
these suggestions should be forwarded as a preliminary submission
suitable for planning purposes, and together with similar inputs
from other agencies, provide a basis for development of a single,
integrated, time-phased plan to focus all efforts on the
objective of justification for US military intervention in Cuba.
RECOMMENDATIONS
8. It is recommended that:
a. Enclosure A together with its attachments should be
forwarded to the Secretary of Defense for approval and
transmittal to the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project.
b. This paper NOT be forwarded to commanders of unified
or specified commands.
c. This paper NOT be forwarded to US officers assigned
to NATO activities.
d. This paper NOT be forwarded to the Chairman, US
Delegation, United Nations Military Staff Committee.
3
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFARN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_41.jpeg ---
13-00000
ANNEX TO APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE A
UNCLASSIFIED
PRETEXTS TO JUSTIFY US MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA
(Note: The courses of action which follow are a preliminary
submission suitable only for planning purposes.
They are
arranged neither chronologically nor in ascending order.
Together with similar inputs from other agencies, they are
intended to provide a point of departure for the development
of a single, integrated, time-phased plan. Such a plan would
permit the evaluation of individual projects within the context
of cumulative, correlated actions designed to lead inexorably
to the objective of adequate justification for US military
intervention in Cuba).
1. Since it would seem desirable to use legitimate
provocation as the basis for US military intervention in Cuba
a cover and deception plan, to include requisite preliminary
actions such as has been developed in response to Task 33 ©,
could be executed as an initial effort to provoke Cuban
reactions. Harassment plus deceptive actions to convince the
Our military
Cubans of imminent invasion would be emphasized.
posture throughout execution of the plan will allow a rapid
change from exercise to intervention if Cuban response justifies.
2.' A series of well coordinated incidents will be planned
to take place in and around Guantanamo tó
give genuine
appearance of being done by hostile Cuban forces.
a. Incidents to establish a credible attack (not in
chronological order):
(1) Start rumors (many). Use clandestine radio.
(2) Land friendly Cubans in uniform "over-the-fence"
to stage attack on base.
(3) Capture Cuban (friendly) saboteurs inside the
base.
(4) Start riots near the base main gate (friendly
Cubans).
Annex to Appendix
7
to Enclosure A
UNCLASSIFIED
TAP STORFT SPECIAL HANDLING
M

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_43.jpeg ---
13-00000
BANULITY.
"NUTURN"
UNCLASSIFIED
The terror campaign could be pointed at Cuban refugees seeking
haven in the United States. We could sink a boatload of Cubans
enroute to Florida.(real or simulated). We could foster attempts
on lives of Cuban refugees in the United States even to the
extent of wounding in instances to be widely publicized.
Exploding a few plastic bombs in carefully chosen spots, the
arrest of Cuban agents and the release of prepared documents
substantiating Cuban involvement also would be helpful in
projecting the idea of an irresponsible government.
5. A "Ouban-based, Castro-supported" filibuster could be
simulated against a neighboring Caribbean nation (in the vein
of the 14th of June invasion of the Dominican Republic). We
know that Castro is backing subversive efforts clandestinely'
against Haiti, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and Nicaragua at
present and possible others. These efforts can be magnified and
additional ones contrived for exposure. For example,¨ advantage
can be taken of the sensitivity of the Dominican Air Force to
intrusions within their national air space. "Cuban" B-26 or
C-46 type aircraft could make cane-burning raids at. night.
Soviet Bloc incendiaries could be found. This could be coupled
with "Cuban" messages to the Communist underground in the
Dominican Republic and "Cuban" shipments of arms which would
be found, or intercepted, on the beach.
6. Use of MIG type aircraft by US pilots could provide
additional provocation. Harassment of civil air, attacks on
surface shipping and destruction of US military drone aircraft:
by MIG type planes would be useful as complementary actions..
An F-86 properly painted would convince air passengers that they
saw a Cuban MIG, especially if the pilot of the transport were
to announce such fact. The primary drawback to this suggestion
appears to be the security risk inherent in obtaining or modify-
ing an aircraft. However, reasonable copies of the MIG could
be produced from US resources in about three months.
i
Annex to Appendix
UNCLASSIFIED
AD GEODEX OF
:
"
:
:
to Enclosure A
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_42.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIE
(5) Blow up ammunition inside the base; start fires.
(6) Burn aircraft on air base (sabotage).
(7) Lob mortar shells from outside of base into base.
Some damage to installations.
(8) Capture assault teams approaching from the sea
or vicinity of Guantanamo City.
(9) Capture militia group which storms the base.
(10) Sabotage ship in harbor; large fires -- napthalene.
(11) Sink ship near harbor entrance. Conduct funerals
for mook-victims (may be lieu of (10)).
b. United States would respond by executing offensive
operations to secure water and power supplies, destroying
artillery and mortar emplacements which threaten the base.
c. Commence large scale United States military operations.
3. A "Remember the Maine" incident could be arranged in
several forms:
a. We could blow up a US ship in Guantanamo Bay and
blame Cuba.
b. We could blow up a drone (unmanned) vessel anywhere
in the Cuban waters. We could arrange to cause such incident-
11
in the vicinity of Havana or Santiago as a spectacular result
of Cuban attack from the air or sea, or both. The presence
of Cuban planes or ships merely investigating the intent of
the vessel could be fairly compelling evidence that the ship
was taken under attack. The nearness to Havana or Santiago
would add credibility especially to those people that might
have heard the blast or have seen the fire. The US could
follow up with an air/sea rescue operation covered by US
fighters to "evacuate" remaining members of the non-existent
crew. Casualty lists in US newspapers would cause a helpful
wave of national indignation.
4. We could develop a Communist Cuban terror campaign in
the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington.
;
8
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET AREAL
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_44.jpeg ---
13-00000
BURULING “MOTOWN":
UNCLASSIF
7. Hijacking attempts against civil air and surface craft
should appear to continue as harassing measures condoned by the
government of Cuba. Concurrently, genuine defections of Cuban
civil and military air and surface craft should be encouraged.
8. It is possible to create an incident which will demonstrate
convincingly that a Cuban aircraft has attacked and shot down
a chartered civil airliner enroute from the United States to
Jamaica, Guatemala, Panama or Venezuela. The destination would
be chosen only to cause the flight plan route to cross Cuba.
The passengers could be a group of college students off on a
holiday or any grouping of persons with a common interest to
support chartering a non-scheduled flight.
•
.
a. An aircraft at Eglin AFB would be painted and
numbered as an exact duplicate for a civil registered
aircraft belonging to a CIA proprietary organization in the
Miami area. At a designated time the duplicate would be
substituted for the actual civil aircraft and would be
loaded with the selected passengers, all boarded under
carefully prepared aliases. The actual registered
aircraft would be converted to a drone.
b. Take off times of the drone aircraft and the actual
aircraft will be scheduled to allow a rendezvous south of
Florida. From the rendezvous point the passenger-carrying
aircraft will descend to minimum altitude and go directly
into an auxiliary field at Eglin AFB where arrangements will
have been made to evacuate the passengers and return the
aircraft to its original status. The drone aircraft
meanwhile will continue to fly the filed flight plan. When
over Cuba. the drone will being transmitting on the inter-
national distress frequency a "MAY DAY" message stating he
is under attack by Cuban MIG aircraft. The transmission
will be interrupted by destruction of the aircraft which will
be triggered by radio signal. This will allow ICAO radio
Annex to Appendix
TAP GERDEL
UNCLASSIFIED
10
to Enclosure A
:
:.
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_45.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
HUTUKN
stations in the Western Help 65 tell the US what
has happened to the aircraft instead of the US trying to
"sell" the incident.
9. It is possible to create an incident which will make it
appear that Communist Cuban MIGs have destroyed a USAF aircraft
over international waters in an unprovoked attack.
a. Approximately 4 or 5 F-101 aircraft will be dispatched
in trail from Homestead AFB, Florida, to the vicinity of Cuba.
Their mission will be to reverse course and simulate fakir
aircraft for an air defense exercise in southern Florida.
These aircraft would conduct variations of these flights at
frequent intervals. Crews would be briefed to remain at
least 12 miles off the Cuban coast; however, they would be
required to carry live ammunition in the event that hostile
actions were taken by the Cuban MIGS.
b. On one such flight, a pre-briefed pilot would fly
tail-end Charley at considerable interval between aircraft.
While near the Cuban Island this pilot would broadcast that
he had been jumped by MIGs and was going down. No other
calls would be made. The pilot would then fly directly
west at extremely low altitude and land at a secure base, an
Eglin auxiliary. The aircraft would be met by the proper
people, quickly stored and given a new tall number. The
pilot who had performed the mission under an alias, would
resume his proper identity and return to his normal place
of business. The pilot and aircraft would then have
disappeared.
c. At precisely the same time that the aircraft was
presumably shot down a submarine or small surface craft
would disburse F-101 parts, parachute, etc., at approximately
15 to 20 miles off the Cuban coast and depart. The pilots
returning to Homestead would have a true story as far as
they knew. Search ships and aircraft could be dispatched
and parts of aircraft found.
UNCLASSIFIED
11'
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
CRETS
KAN STRAK TAN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_47.jpeg ---
13-00000
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENŢIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : JCS
RECORD NUMBER: 202-10002-10018
RECORDS SERIES : JCS CENTRAL FILE 1963
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: JCS 2304/189
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
Cuba Selected Documents
#3
ORIGINATOR : JCS
FROM:
TO :
J-5
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
TITLE : COURSES OF ACTION RELATED TO CUBA (CASE II)
DATE : 05/01/63
PAGES : 36
SUBJECTS : POLICY, CUBA
REVOLT IN CUBA
COVERT OPERATIONS, CUBA
OPLAN 312
OPLAN 316
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: OPEN IN FULL
CURRENT STATUS: OPEN
TE OF LAST REVIEW : 07/23/97
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS JCS Central Files 1963, Box 4. Report to Joint Chiefs
and Joint Staff discussing courses of action toward
Cuba.
[R] - ITEM IS RESTRICTED

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_46.jpeg ---
13-00000
TUT
SECRET OF SPECIAL” HANDLIKS
NOFORN
ENCLOSURE B
FACTS HEARING ON THE PROBLEM
UNCLASSIFic
1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have previously stated
that US unilateral military intervention in Cuba can be
undertaken in the event that the Cuban regime commits hostile
acts against US forces or property which would serve as an
incident upon which to base overt intervention.
2. The need for positive action in the event that current
covert efforts to foster an internal Cuban rebellion are
unsuccessful was indicated** by the Joint Chiefs of Staff
on 7 March 1962, as follows:
determination that a credible internal
revolt is impossible of attainment during the next
9-10 months will require a decision by the United States
to develop a Cuban "provocation" as justification for
positive US military action."
3. It is understood that the Department of State also is
preparing suggested courses of action to develop justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.
:
* JCS 1969/303
** JCS 1969/313
12
UNCLASSIFIED
Enclosure B

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_5.jpeg ---
13-00000
JOINT STAFF PAPERS (147 documents)
Using broad topic guidelines provided previously by ARRB staff, the Joint Staff at the
Pentagon has reviewed 40 boxes of records of Joint Chiefs Chairmen Lyman Lemnitzer,
Maxwell Taylor, and Earle Wheeler for 1961-1964, as well as JCS central files for 1962
and 1963, and has flagged 147 documents which will enhance the historical
understanding of the Kennedy administration, and which some scholars will believe
may be relevant to the assassination.
Topics:
(1)
(2)
ICCCA (Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairs)
meetings regarding future U.S. policy toward Cuba.
Special Group (5412 committee) meetings and decisions; and covert
paramilitary operations against Cuba.
(3) Cuban coup planning.
(4)
Vietnam coup planning, and discussion of Diem and Nhu.
(5)
OPLAN 34A (covert actions against North Vietnam).
(6)
U.S. military strength levels in Vietnam.
Apparent Equities:
Multiple agency equities appear to apply to virtually every document--usually
State, OSD and/or NSC. The Joint Staff has stated in writing that it is prepared
to expeditiously process these documents for declassification in collaboration
with agencies which have equities, and then accession the declassified
documents to NARA. Currently the Joint Staff is awaiting guidance from ARRB
staff on which of the tabbed folders we desire to have placed in the collection;
upon receipt of that guidance, they will commence declassification review.
Horne e:\wp-docs\Jointstaff.wpd
File: 4.0.4

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_48.jpeg ---
13-00000
JCS
1126
REPORT BY 40K
waper that open poOSENBE
ana-1 ((2) or Policy, MemorePC) Cicim
DÉSTRUTBÚA ZONA
my angel
BOWBET
220/5
NEOMAR
AND DECU
ATHON
Vised by 3rd gewilgendem se13:
SYSTEMA EISALLY REVINNE
CONSSIFICADON CANSKOED
HEMELON
:
..

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_49.jpeg ---
13-00000
OEN
COURSES OF ACTION RELATED TO CUB
THE PROBLEM
1. In response to a reque from the Chairman Joint
Chiefs of Staff, to provide comment and recommendation.
concerning the requirement
and the
rabil.
W
fomenting a revolt in Cul
conside
the
+
advantage of engineering
invasion
Fucident
alternate cause for 5
6
FACTS BEART
2. The Chairman, Joint Ch
25 March 1963*, requested
ments to plan and incite
part therein, "In view
"In view of past
HE PROBLEM
Staf by CM
437-63, dated 7
8
study be made of the require-
Cuba He stated, in
ities in inffitratin
10
agents into Cuba and of obtai
information out of
11
Cuba, it will always be extremely
ifi
timed uprising in proper
fon
on to US
to contrive a
preparations to exploit 13.
12
it: Hence consideration should be
engineering an incident)
trying to generate and
involving many Cubans of doubt
3. CINCLANT has forwarded
revolt well conceived:
by US military forces"
advantages 14
rather than 15
16
:
17
proposed concept
Cúban, 18
cecuted nd supported overtl
19
elated le
on the use
20
Cuban, nationals.
21
DISCUSSION
For discussion, see Enclosure B.
* Enclosure to JCS 2304/176
** Attachment to JCS 2304/171
*** Attachment to JCS 2304/168
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
JCS 2304/189
(Rev: 5/13/63)
UNCLASSIFIED
1103
LOF SECRET
22

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_50.jpeg ---
13-00000
the United St
Castro government will
efforts and ability to
increas
NOPUS
terveneermilitari
1
d as
2
ommunism-wia
:3
6. The United States should intervener ml
and could” (a)-engineer provod:
in Cuba)
5
incidents ostensibl
6
perpetrated by the Casti
Cuba.
egime:
Coment
ey
7. Engineered provocations would
in control, timing, simplicity and security than would a
fomented revolt. It would be most. ffioul
.8
greater advantages
9
10
generate a
11
12
13
widespread effective revolt. However, the staging of a local
uprising as a contrived incident should not be precluded.
8. The United States should:
•
14
Foreate pretext
15
vention in Cuba
16
✓ Initiate a coordinated program
for overt US militar
In support of the above, undertake a flexibly phased 17
effort to build Cuban resistance pote
18
with the intensification intelligencerc
commencing
lection and
.19
20
21
sabotage in Cuba, and the creation of framework for
guerrilla activity.
riate military
c. At a propitious, time launch appropriat
action to remove the Castro ommunis government
2222 222 22 2 2 2 2 2 3
27
28
29
23
one governmental organi
24
r developing
25
26
9. It would appear neces
zation be given the primary responsibili
national plan.
O The Joint Chiefs
development of this natio
foula
participate in the
11. The broad concepts herein and the views of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff should be forwarded to the Special Group (5412 30
Committee) for consideration under the provisions of NSAM 57:*31
Enclosure to JCS 1969/217
JCS 2304/189
30/13/63)
(Rev.: 5/13/63)
UNCLASSIFIED
FOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_53.jpeg ---
13-00000
..
f
TOP SECRE
GO
UNCLASSIFIED TOP SECRET
APPENDIX
DISCUSSION
INTRODUCTION
'
1. Purpose. This report is in response to a request from
the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, to consider the desira-
bility and requirements of a fomented revolt in Cuba. It
includes an examination of engineering an incident or a series
of incidents as a cause for invasion and consideration of
pertinent comments received from CINCLANT.
2. Summary. Study of the desirability and the requirements
of a fomented revolt in Cuba and of the advantages of
engineering an incident or a series of incidents rather than
trying to generate and coordinate action from inside involving
many Cubans of doubtful reliability leads to the conclusions
that:
a. It is unlikely that an effective spontaneous revolt
will occur in the near future.
b. Any uprising without US overt support is likely to
be short-lived because of the improved Cuban/Soviet.
military capabilities presently in Cuba and Castro's
increasingly efficient internal security operations.
c. There appears to be little likelihood that the Castro
communist regime will risk a direct provocation that
could be used as a pretext for US intervention.
d. Unless the United States intervenes militarily, the
Castro government will become more firmly entrenched and its
efforts and ability to spread international communism will
increase.
e. The United States should intervene militarily in
Cuba and could (a) engineer provocative incidents ostensibly
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
1
UNCLASSIFIED
Appendix
:
(Rev. 5/13/63)
:
¿CRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_51.jpeg ---
13-00000
RECOMMENDA
13 recommended Ban
he memorat
MICHOBU
boyer concluB1 LE
Must be forwarded on a s DEELED
peeld Hardline
Required
Not Relectable to foreig
the secretary of Defense
b. The memorandum.
cnclosure 1. together with tha
mant or Exerente to, Pelkey on oldes
107060%
hla tamen NOT be D
160
Accion Off-roete Colo
estern Hemigone?
warded
ERBY ONTEOK
12
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_55.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
:.
TOP SECRET
-
SENSITIVE
UNCLASSIFIED
b. Conduct physical and psychological military harassment
of the Cuban regime and covert and clandestine operations as
directed.
c. Undertake military action in Cuba in accordance with
contingency plans approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and.
directed by the President. The primary purpose of the US
military intervention would be to assure the overthrow of
the Castro communist government and to assist in the establish.
ment of a new, non-communist government acceptable to the
United States.
20. The implementation of any of the suggested courses of
action in this study would involve many agencies of the United
States Government. It would appear necessary, therefore, that
one single governmental organization be given the primary
responsibility for developing a national plan.
21. Because of the extensive military operations involved,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff should participate in the development
of this national plan. In addition, for a contrived revolt,
they should be assigned the specific responsibility for develop-
ing the military and paramilitary aspects of the plan. This
would require the Joint Chiefs of Staff to seek a determination
under NSAM 57 when a revolt contrived by the United States were
an operation large enough to warrant control of covert forces
by the Department of Defense and that CINCLANT be designated as
the DOD agent. In this connection, CINCLANT has developed a
specific concept for political and military action in Cuba.
CINCLANT CONCEPT
22. The CINCLANT concept provides for inciting a revolt in
Cuba, followed by overt, large-scale US military operations.
The proposed timing of operations permits completion in 15-18
months. Supporting operations by CIA, State, and USIA will
be required.
TOP SECRET
12
(Rev. 5/13/63)
UNCLASSIFIED
Appendix
TOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_56.jpeg ---
13-00000
OP SECRET = SENSITIVE
UNCLASSIFIED
SECRET-
23. Preliminary operations require the introduction by CIA
as soon as practicable of assets into Cuba for the development
of intelligence, the organization by State of a Free Cuban
Government (FCG), the development of a propaganda plan by USIA, and
the development of a suitable cover plan.
24. Actual operations would commence with the execution by
CINCLANT of OPLAN 380-63 about 15 January 1964. This plan calls
for infiltrating of UW forces into Cuba for area assessment,
establishing guerrilla bases, developing military units,
establishing escape and evasion nets and conducting subversion.
On about 15 June 1964, UW forces would be augmented and would
accelerate subversive operations to create conditions favorable
for establishing a Free Cuban Government on Cuban soil and for
employment of conventional forces.
25. CINCLANT then proposed that on about 15 July mobilization
of forces for US conventional operations would begin. Execution of
CINCLANT OPLAN 312 would commence on 26 July 1964 followed by
D-Day OPLAN“ 316, about 3 August 19€4.
26. Although the foregoing schedule is approximate, it should
be noted that the Free Cuban Government would be required to
exist at least for 18 days in the face of the Castro government's
: excellent counterguerrilla ability. This time requirement appears
to be excessive, but it could be shortened. The criteria for
United States recognition of a new government could be met in
this period. The Free Cuban Government could claim it:
a. Was in actual possession of the governmental machinery.
b. Was administering it with general acceptance by the
population; and,
c. Was prepared to honor international obligations.
TOP SECRET
(Rev. 5/13/63)
SENSITIVE
13
UNCLASSIFIED
Appendix
TOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_52.jpeg ---
13-00000
ENCE SURE T
DR
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
Subject == courses of sociau telated to cuba
The Jo the Chiefs of state have sconsidered the courses
ction that might be taken by the United States boxc
to contrive
xt for US military intervention in Achoa; They
the opinion that the discussion in the Appendix hereto svourd
be usefta
qur Frec
in your capacity as Executive Agent of the
Department for Defense for Poll
Policy toward subac
Re
2307/189
GROUP A
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOM
DOWNGRADING AND DEGRASS IFICATION
1125
Enclosure

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_54.jpeg ---
13-00000
-
SENSITIVES
URL LASSIFIED
perpetrated by the Castro regime to serve as the cause of
Invasion or (b) foment a revolt within Cuba which would
call for US military intervention.
f. Engineered provocation would provide greater advantages
in control, timing, simplicity, and security than would a
fomented revolt. It would be most difficult to generate a
widespread effective revolt. However, the staging of a local
uprising as a contrived incident should not be precluded.
8. The United States should:
(1) Initiate a coordinated program to create a pre-
text for US military intervention in Cuba.
(2) In support of the above, undertake a flexibly
phased effort to build Cuban resistance potential, com-
mending with the intensification of intelligence collec-
tion and sabotage in Cuba, and the creation of a frame-
work for guerrilla activity.
(3) At a propitious time, launch appropriate military
action to remove the Castro communist government.
h. Implementation of the above would involve many
agencies of the United States Government.
It would appear
necessary that one governmental organization should be
given the primary responsibility for developing such a
national plan. The Joint Chiefs of Staff should participate
in the development of this national plan.
1. The broad concepts herein and the views of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff should be forwarded to the Special Group
(5412 Committee) for consideration under the provisions of
NSAM 57.
J. CINCLANT's concept for fomenting a revolt in Cuba
while containing much merit, should be re-examined both
for its timing and for the large-scale guerrilla activity
it envisages.
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
(Rev. 5/13/63)
2
Appendix
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_57.jpeg ---
13-00000
:'
.
FOR SEGRET SENSITIVE
UNCLASSIFIED SECRET
27. The UW forces required for CINCLANT OPLAN 380-63 are
approximately:
(1) Headquarters, Joint
6 Off
42 KM
Unconventional Warfare Task
Force, Atlantic (JUWTFA)
(2) UW Operating Base
36 Off
482 EM
(3) Support Units
15 Off
331 EM
(4) Special Forces
(5) Submarines
(6) APD
(7) SEAL Teams
1
1
1 Group Headquarter
(reinf.)
2 Companies (reinf.
2
l
1
(8) Air Commandos ·
(9)
(9) CIA Forces
=
"
150 Personnel
20 Aircraft
4 Air Control Teams
Internal and External
assets as required by
CINCLANT.
28. CINCLANT does not have UW forces assigned at this time,
however, a nucleus JUWTFA staff is included within the CINCLANT
staff and has the capability for preparing UW plans for normal
contingencies. Planning or conducting UW operations of the
magnitude envisaged in CINCLANT's concept in this plan is beyond
current capabilities.
29. At an appropriate time in preliminary operations the
activation of the JUWTFA as a separate organization and the
assignment to it of full wartime headquarters complement of
48 officers, 56 enlisted men, and five civilians would be
required. Approval of any concept in principle or for
planning purposes, however, would not necessitate the
TOP SECRET –¨ SENSITIVE.
(Rev. 5/13/63)
· 14
Appendix
UNCLASSIFIED
ZANOCRET
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_6.jpeg ---
13-00000
1
"NISSVSS
SSINATION
REVIEW
RECORDS
BOARD
June 9, 1997
Stewart F. Aly
Associate Deputy General Counsel
Office of General Counsel
Department of Defense
1600 Defense Pentagon
Washington, DC 20301-1600
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW • 2nd Floor • Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 • Fax: (202) 724-0457
A HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
Mr. Edmund McBride.
Chief, Information Management
Division
Joint Secretariat
Joint Staff
The Pentagon, Room 2B917
Washington, DC 20318-0400
Re: Proposal for a Multi-Agency Declassification Review of Selected Papers of JCS
Chairmen Lemnitzer, Taylor and Wheeler, and Selected JCS Central Files
under the IFK Act
Gentlemen:
The Assassination Records Review Board would like to make arrangements with you to
declassify approximately 147 records previously flagged by the Joint Staff from both the
JCS Central Files, and the papers of JCS Chairmen Lemnitzer, Taylor and Wheeler. The
files date principally from the period 1961-64. The records were flagged during
searches directed by Mr. Edmund McBride (Chief, Information Management Division,
Joint Staff) at the request of the ARRB staff. With one exception, ARRB staff feels that.
all records flagged by Mr. McBride's working group are relevant to the historical
understanding or context of the assassination of President Kennedy. A description of
the records, which primarily pertain to U.S. activities related to Cuba, or to Vietnam
policy, is attached hereto. We have identified what appear to us to be equities of
numerous military entities in these papers, as well as equities of the Central Intelligence
Agency, the State Department, the National Security Council, and others.
Deadlines
Due to the volume of the records, and the Review Board's current sunset date of
September 30, 1997, it is important that we proceed expeditiously in our review of the
records.' We have slated these papers for review by the Board at its August 5-6, 1997 meeting.
'The Review Board is seeking from Congress a one-year, one-time extension to
September 30, 1998. Congressman Dan Burton is sponsoring a bill to extend the life of
the Review Board. Should the Review Board receive the proposed extension, we may
Board Members: John R. Tunheim, Chair • Henry F. Graff • Kermit L. Hall • William L. Joyce • Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: David G. Marwell
:
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_58.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
->
SENSITIVE
TOP SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED ™
activation of a separate headquarters. In this case, CINCLANT
would re-evaluate his staff capabilities and submit appropriate
recommendations to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
30. CINCLANT in a related outline concept recommended, con-
cerning the use of Cuban nationals in UW operations, that "AB
practical, the Military Services should initially form their
Cuban nationals into integral, all Cuban units . . .". It is
considered that the creation of a "Cuban Expeditionary Force" 'in
anticipation of its employment in the execution of OPLAN 316 18
a risk which cannot be justified and should not be undertakan.
There appears to be no reason, however, why Cubans could not be
formed into small teams for use in UW activities. It is estimated
that from two to four hundred carefully selected Cubans could be
used in this role. It would be appropriate for the CIA in a
supporting role to select and train the individuals forming them
into teams of appropriate size to be made available for joint use
by CINCLANT or by CIA, as necessary.
31. For other details of training Cuban nationals, see
JCSM-350-63.
32. The force levels in CINCLANT OPLANS 312 and 316 are adequate
to cope with the improved Cuban military capability and the
presence of Soviet troops on the island. :
33. The experience of the JUWTFA during the Cuban crisis in
October 1962, indicates that the present military supply system
in the CONUS will be unable immediately to provide equipment and
supplies in the required configuration for projected UW operations
in Cuba. The Army is currently studying prestockage of UW equip-
ment and will submit proposals for approval and financing.
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
(Rev. 5/13/63)
15
Appendix

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_59.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
ENOTO TIn
-
URCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET
34. The conceptual outline submitted by CINCLANT does not.
provide an exact plan in detail for contriving a revolt in
Cuba. However, his general concept would provide for:
"a. Incremental steps in replacing the present communist
dominated government of Cuba by infiltration, subversion,
unconventional warfare, limited conventional actions and
finally full-scale invàsior in that order, if necessary.
b. The capability of US to withdraw at any point in the
process if unfavorable international reactions or pressures
require it; or if the Cuban people themselves, in a successful
revolt, overthrow the present regime and form a government
favorable to US interests.
c. An ambiguous atmosphere during the critical phases
in its development which would not present the Soviets with
a direct confrontation of power until events would preclude
timely action on their part to prevent our intended result
in Cuba.
d. Utilization of the OAS Forum and support without being
dependent upon OAS approval or disapproval for the necessary
intermediate steps leading up to OAS recognition of a Cuban
Government in exile and the final, decisive military action.
e. Maximum utilization of the Cuban refugee elements
in the US for political and military support without
depending upon their effectiveness for the ultimate success
of the plan.
f. No maldeployment of US forces, affecting the over-all
US military posture, until the final decisive stages of
the plan are ready for execution, thus reducing maldeployment
time.
g. The most economical use of US resources to accomplish
the defeat of Castro communism.
h. A definite time scale of events culminating in the
defeat of Castro's communist government and establishing
the groundwork for the installation of a government compatible
with the aims of the OAS and friendly to the US by 1 October
1964."
TOP SECRET
-
-SENCIA EU
UPCLASSIFIES

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_60.jpeg ---
13-00000
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER: 198-10004-10011
RECORDS SERIES : CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
Cuba Selected Documents
#4
ORIGINATOR: ARMY
FROM:
R. D. ALBRO
TO: OFFICE, SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
TITLE : TRAINING OF CUBAN REFUGEES IN NICARAGUA
DATE : : 12/11/63
PAGES :
11
SUBJECTS: ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS
ARTIME, MANUEL
CUBAN BRIGADE
KENNEDY, ROBERT
CUBAN EXILE TRAINING IN NICARAGUA
DOCUMENT TYPE : PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: OPEN IN FULL
CURRENT STATUS: OPEN
TE OF LAST REVIEW : 10/07/97
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : Califano Papers, Box 6, Folder 10. Memo regarding
training of Cubans in Nicaragua, recriutment efforts
of Manuel Artime, meeting between Artime and Robert
Kennedy, and Cubans in US Army.
[R] · ITEM IS RESTRICTED
-
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_61.jpeg ---
13-00000
990919
MAHOR
ACSI-CX
ATT
SUBJETS
Train
Secret
SECRET
20310
11 DEC 1963
RETARY OF THE ARMY
HR. JOSEPH CALIFANO, GENERAL COUNSEL
fugees in Nicaragus (8)
19 Nov 63, above subject,
“office,
b. Intelligence Report #2870006563, 9 Aug 63, Subject:
Prominent Cuban Exfled Länders visit Nicaragua (U), from USARMA, Nicaragua
Puerto Cabetat
téport #2870009363, 31 Oct 63, Subject:
as (U), from USARMA, Nicaragua
d. Summary of Information, 1 Nov 63, 112th INTC Gp, Subject:
Cuban Officer Training Program (U).
e. Hemandum for Record, ACSI-CX, 19 Nov 63, Subject:
Cuban Brigade Member (U)
2. (8) Reference
erence la, prepared at the request of your office, advised
nagua within the U. S. Embassy there, revealed no
that query by URAHM
indication
Chief of US
'
D. McPhail, 0-30613, USA Retired, the former
in anyway involved in the training of Cuban
•
3. (C) During the above inquiry, the USARMA, Managua called attention
to two intelligence reports he had furnished (references lb. and lc above)
reporting Nicaraguan press comment on the visit of exiled Cuban refugee
leaders Dr. Manuel ARTIME Buesa, Dr. Carlos PRIO Socarras, Dr. Manuel
Antonio DE VARONA, Dr. Francisco FERNANDEZ Pla, Dr. Laureano BATISTA, Dr.
Orlando. PUENTES, R, Mignal DR LEON, and Roberto RODRIGUEZ to Nicaragua
during July and August 1963. The USARMA's comment on the newspaper
speculation and rumors concerning this visit was that he "does not have
any firm information or indicators that anti-Castro forces are being trained
in Nicaragua."
OSA. ASG. CONTROT NO. 2873 B
WARNING NOTICE
"GENSITIVE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED
EYEGLASSIFIED BY ARMY
PELASSIF
DECLASSIFICATION ACTIVITY
DEODET
OLUME
Ase
DATE: 30017948-490-63
DOWNGRADED AT 12 YEAR INTERVALS:
NOT AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIEP
DÒD DIR 5200.10

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_64.jpeg ---
13-00000
JUL 231997
SERICIIIVE
19 December 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting with President on Cuba, 1100 hrs, 19 Dec 1963
1. The following persons were present at the meeting:
White House:
State:
Defense:.
CIA:.
. . . . . . . The President
Mr. McGeorge Bundy.
Mr. Smith
Mr. Thompson
Mr. Ball
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Martin
Mr. Crimmins
Mr. Gilpatric
Mr. Vance
General Wheeler
General Carter
Mr. FitzGerald
Mr. Helms
Mr. Dillon
1.
Treasury:.
USIA:
.Mr. Wilson
2. Mr. FitzGerald briefed the President on Agency operations
covering the following areas:
a. Collection of -intelligence.
b. Propaganda activities.
c.
Economic denial actions.
d. Exploitation of Cuban military disaffection.
e. Sabotage and harrassment activities.
f. Support of autonomous anti-Castro groups.
LXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIN 5200. DO NOT APPLY
INTEL ASSIFIED!
SENSITIVE
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_63.jpeg ---
13-00000
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM.
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : JCS
RECORD NUMBER: 202-10002-10010
RECORDS SERIES : TAYLOR PAPERS
GENCY FILE NUMBER
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
Cuba Selected Documents
#5
ORIGINATOR : JCS
FROM: EARLE G. WHEELER
TO :
TITLE : MEETING WITH PRESIDENT ON CUBA, 1100 HRS, 19 DEC 1963
DATE : 12/19/63
PAGES : 3
SUBJECTS
: POLICY AND PLANNING, CUBA
OPERATIONS, CUBA
DOCUMENT TYPE : PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: OPEN IN FULL
CURRENT STATUS: OPEN
E OF LAST REVIEW : 07/31/97
OPENING CRITERIA
COMMENTS : Wheeler, Box 193. Memorandum reporting meeting with
President on Cuba. 1 Document.
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED-
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_62.jpeg ---
13-00000
OPFT
7
11 DEC 1963
ACSI-CX
SUBJECT: Training of Cuban Refugees in Nicaragua (8)
Reference 1d. from the A. C. of B, G-2, Fourth Army reports
ARTIER Buesa, to
invision to resign the
and 20 with him to a revolutionary camp in Nicaragua
reference is inclosed for your information. COMARC, Fourth Army and 3rd
Army have been directed to continue to report on the alleged recruiting
copy of this
activity by ARTIHE
rence ls. reports information received from Ft, Holabird,
former. Cuban Brighde member, 2nd Lt. Jose Raul VAROMA Gonzales,
been invited by 2nd Lt. Eneido OLIVA (Former ascend in
Bay of Pign) to visit Washington, D. d. on 18 Nov 63 to
the Attorney General
was the G-2 of sriindes
ed from Washington he
gton ha de
udent
Cuban
fon seeing.
Mr. Kennedy, but did say that he had met with Lt. OLIV. The actual
purpose of the meeting is not known. A copy of reference le. is inclosed
for your information.. Hr. Robert Kennedy did confer on 17 Nov 68 with
Manual. ARTIG Ruess, Reberto SAN ROMAN aka Roberto Peren SAN ROMAN, Jose
SAN ROMAN aka Jose Pares SAN ROMAN, and Enrique Jose HUTZ William Alfert.
They vace Also scheduled to meet with Hr. Robert Kennedý on either 21 or
22 November 1963. There is no indication that Ft. Holabird student VARONA
was present.
6. (c)
(C) This office has no information whether Mr. Kannedy is aware
of ARTIME's alleged recruiting activity. The information in paragraphs 3
through 5 above, and the inclosures hereto, are furnished in the event
that they may be of some pertinence to your inquiry regarding Colonel
McPhail, reference is. above.
Incl
88
OEL CHICK OF RAVEE
DEC 15 SbH.e3
Kviг& BEC REC
VECEIVED
HING NOTICE
NGITIVE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLTED
Sga) R. D. Albro, Col; GS
R. D. ALERO
Colonel, GS
Director of Foreign Intelligence
2
SEGRET
DEC IS IS AS SH .23
QUICK
COOBNIKYJORD
1219
DOWNGRADED AT 12 YEAR INTERVI
NOT AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIE
DQD DIR 5200.10

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_66.jpeg ---
13-00000
to the CAS prior to 10 January 1964. In the meantime, our effort
is devoted to ascertaining the maximum that the OAS is prepared
to do as a result of the Venezuela affair. They are hopeful that the
CAS will support an increased surveillance system. He thinks it is
too early to expect a complete break in economic and travel relations
between OAS countries and Cuba.
5. There was come discussion of further actions we might
take to increase pressures and harrassments at an appropriate time.
Among other items mentioned were the effect of low level reconnaissance
flight from time to time and the desirability of executing such flights
at intervals to maintain the viability of our "right" to do so. While the
President did not express disapprobation, neither did he express
approval. In fact, no real decisions weré takon at this meeting which
must be regarded, I think, as being an important orientation session.
COPIES TO:
Chairman, JCS
#1
COAF #>
Signed - Earle G. Wheeler
EARLE G. WHEELER
General, United States Army
Chief of Staff
CNO #4
CMC S
Director Jt Staff (Attn: SACSA) *
Army General Counsel #7
cg #?
$4
ors &c.
OUTSU
UNCLASSIFIED
SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_67.jpeg ---
13-00000
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : JCS
RECORD NUMBER : 202-10002-10117
RECORDS SERIES : JCS CENTRAL FILES 1963
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : JCSM-77-64
ORIGINATOR :
: JCS
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
Cuba Selected Documents
#6
FROM :
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
TO: SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
TITLE : A CONTINGENCY PLAN FOR A COUP IN CUBA
DATE: 01/31/64
PAGES :
SUBJECTS :
58
POLICY AND PLANNING, CUBA
COUP IN CUBA
CONTINGENCY PLANNING, CUBA
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: OPEN IN FULL
CURRENT STATUS: OPEN
DATE OF LAST REVIEW :
OPENING CRITERIA :
10/07/97
COMMENTS : JCS Central Files 1963, Box 4. Memo for Chairman, JCS
regarding contingency plans in the event of a coup in
Cuba.
:
1
[R]
->
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
:

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_68.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET-SENSITIVE
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON 28, D.C.
UNCLASSIFIED
SM-161-64
31 January 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE COMMANDER IN CHIEF, ATLANTIC
Subject: A Contingency Plan for a Coup in Cuba (S)
1. Transmitted herewith is a conceptual proposal, subject as above,
which has been developed jointly by the Department of State, the Depart-.
ment of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency.
2. This concept envisions a coup occurring in Cuba which may,
supported by the United States, achieve US national objectives by the
elimination of the communist regime and establishment of a Cuban
government acceptable to the United States.
3. The proposal provides for US military intervention in a flexible
manner covering a spectrum ranging from provision of logistic support
to full execution of OPLANS 312, and 316. Conditions under which military
intervention at a level LESS than that of OPLAN 316 might be undertaken
are generally in consonance with those described in JCS Message 8970,
.DTG 070155Z March 1963.
B
4. It is desired that CINC LANT prepare a separate contingency plan
to support a coup in Cuba within the context of conditions. described in.
the attachment hereto.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: .
Attachment
UNCLASSIFIED
-TOP SECRET-SENSITIVE
MJ angelido
M. J. INGELIDO
Brig Gen, USAF
Secretary
GROUP 1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSIFICATION
Copy 11 of 22 copies, each of 1 page, Series A
SYSTEMATICALLY REVIEWED
BY JOS ON 1.9 OCT 1989
CLASSIFICATION CONTINUED
--
1
das pelorusstij
:
t. corry out the dutko.

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_65.jpeg ---
13-00000
3. a. The President was most interested in economic denial
actions. He was informed that talks would be undertaken in the
immediate future with representatives of the Canadian and British
governments relative to the supply of spare parts and critical materials
by Canadian and British firms to Cuba. It was stated that Spanish firms
are likewise active in this area, as well as a number of essentially
fly-by-night firms located in a number of foreign countries. No
putable American firms are engaged in supplying Cuba and, in fact,
have been helpful in preventing their foreign affiliates from engaging
in this traffic. Apparently. State regards the Canadian, the British
and the Spanish efforts as being the real trouble spots. The President
directed that State undertake talks, as appropriate, with the governmenta
of firms concerned to dissuade them from this practice.
b. Under questioning, Mr. FitzGerald stated that exploitation
of Cuban military disaffection is a long term undertaking. While there.
are disaffected Cuban military men in important posts, they have not,
to date, made any contacts with each other nor formed any sort of group.
However, Mr. FitzGerald considers that any successful operation to
overthrow Castro emanating from within Cuba will have to be supported
by the Cuban military if it is to have any real likelihood of success.
c. During the discussion on sabotage and harrassment, the
President expressed his reluctance to undertake high risk actions at
this time for two reasons:
(1) Current attempts to get OAS agreement to various
actions directed against Cuba might be jeopardized; and
(2) The Soviets seem to be watching closely the new
administration's policies toward Cuba, and it might influence unfavorably
the success of our efforts to achieve further reductions in Soviet military
personnel in Cuba..
4. Mr. Helms briefed on the significance of the arms cache
discovered in Venezuela. Mr. Martín briefed upon the activities of
the OAS survey group now in Venezuela and the results, to date, of
their survey. He stated that the group apparently had accepted that
the arms had been introduced for subversive purposes, but that the.
survey group was asking of the Venezuelan government further informa-
tion regarding propaganda activities directed against the Venezuelan
government, etc. He does not expect that the commission will report
SENSITIVE
2
DECLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_7.jpeg ---
13-00000
Messrs. Aly and McBride
June 9, 1997
Page 2
i
The Review Board staff is prepared to assist you in making arrangements for a prompt
and efficient review of these selected papers of Joint Chiefs Lemnitzer, Taylor, and
Wheeler, and the Joint Staff Central Files.²
Preliminary Review of Papers of JCS Chairmen and Joint Staff Central Files
The Review Board staff has conducted an initial review of the records and has
tentatively reached the following conclusions: first, the records are very similar in
subject manner to many other records that already are a part of the JFK Collection;
second, although the vast majority of the records technically remain classified, there is
little remaining sensitivity due to the passage of time and to the release of much of the
information in other contexts; and third, these papers contain equities of numerous
military and non-military agencies, which, under the standard referral process, would
be very difficult and time-consuming. Thus, the logistical problem in declassifying the
records is not the continued sensitivity of the records, but the number of agencies that
will need to review their own equities in the records. For this reason, and for the short
time-line on which we are now operating, we believe that there is an urgent need to
make acceptable arrangements for the review and referral of records.
Proposal
In order to expedite the process and make it more efficient, we would like to propose an
alternate arrangement for declassification of records that we previously have found
effective. We suggest the holding of a multi-agency concurrent review of these papers
of the three aforementioned JCS Chairmen and the JCS Central Files. We would like to
schedule a single session at our offices, on or before July 23, 1997, where all agencies
with equities in these JCS/Joint Staff papers be concurrently present for a
declassification review. At such a session, agencies would be able to review their own
be able to revisit the schedule proposed below.
'The Joint Staff's Initial Statement of Compliance to the Review Board, dated
February 6, 1997, identified in detail the process by which these records were located-
namely, which files were searched, and who participated in the searches. Mr. Edmund
McBride, Chief of the Joint Staff Information Management Division, indicated in this
statement that the Joint Staff was standing by to expeditiously process these records for
declassification in collaboration with other agencies when the ARRB was ready. ARRB
staff has only recently completed its initial review of these records, which constitute
selectively flagged folders within 40 boxes of JCS and Joint Staff records.
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_69.jpeg ---
13-00000
✓
ARTA
DEPA
ITI U
OF
STATES OF AMERICA
TOP SECRET
´DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
SENSITIVE
UNCLASSIFIED
DEC 50 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
IN REPLY REFER TO:
SUBJECT:
"
A Contingency Plan for a Coup in Cuba (S)
}
Cy3/1.
Reference:
JCSM 809-63, Subject as above, dated October 21,
1963.
Enclosed herewith are three copies of the plan on the above
subject which has been prepared jointly on a restricted basis by
representatives of the Departments of State and Defense in coordina-
tion with the Central Intelligence Agency. The plan, which has been
revised to reflect generally the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
contained in reference, provides a conceptual basis for US response
to a Cuban military coup and has been approved by the Secretaries
of State and Defense and the Director, Central Intelligence Agency as
a basis for appropriate detailed planning. Mr. McGeorge Bundy has
been advised of the foregoing and requested to inform the President
of the existence of the plan on a suitable occasion. It is anticipated
that the Secretaries of State and Defense may subsequently be
requested to brief the President on its outline.
In accordance with the recommendations contained in paragraph
8c, page 22 of the plan, it is requested that current CINCLANT plans
be revised as necessary to reflect the concept of military operations
described in the plan and that you advise me when this has been accom-
plished.
In accordance with paragraph 8b, page 22 of the plan,
representatives of the central Intelligence Agency in coordination with
representatives of the Departments of State and Defense will develop a
plan for the introduction of the "Special Team" into Cuba which will
subsequently be circulated for appropriate action and further detailed
planning by agencies concerned.
* Enclosure A to JCS 2304/205-1
** Appendix to Enclosure B to
JCS 2304/205-2
Enclosure: (3 cys)
As Stated
we
ice
| Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary of the Army
SYSTEMATICALLY REVIEWED
BY JCS ON 19 OCT 1989
CLASSIFICATION CONTINUED
No.7/50352/ TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DCD
UNCLASSIFIED
NOT APPLY

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_70.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
UNCLASSIFIED
A CONTINGENCY PLAN. FOR A COUP IN CUBA
1.
Problem. To provide planning guidance for US response to a coup in
Cuba in order to assure that US intervention, if undertaken, results in
replacement of the Communist government with one acceptable to the United
States.
2. Assumptions.
a.
The leaders of the coup may or may not be aware, from previous
contact with CIA, that if they agree to and appear capable of meeting
certain specified conditions (see paragraph 2.d. below), their revolt
will be supported by the US if a US "special team" (see paragraph 3.b.(1)
below) confirms that the criteria for support have been adequately met.
Thus, the coup could be triggered in one of two ways: The leaders, in
secure radio contact with CIA, implement their plan with US concurrence
and establish a Provisional Government in full expectation of forthcoming
US support barring a complete and immediate crushing of the uprising; or,
less acceptably, the leaders, in the belief that they can meet probable
criteria for US support, initiate the coup without consulting with or
obtaining the concurrence of the US but establish a Provisional Govern-
ment, hoping that the US will intervene,
Div
b. If the US had prior knowledge of the coup, up to forty-eight
hours would be required after initiation of the action to introduce into
Cuba and receive reports from a "special team" which would obtain in-
formation to assist in making a decision to support the insurgents; if the
US did not have prior knowledge, a longer time would be required.
This document contains 22 pages.
Copy No.
Series
of
-
copies.
OSA, ASC Control NoT/S 0354
SYSTEMATICALLY REVIEWED 1989
OCT
BY JCS ON
CLASSIFICATION CONTINUED
TOP SECRET-SENSITIVE
Re 2304/205-3 CLASSIFIED

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_71.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
ASITIVE.
UNCLASSIFIED
C. US intervention would be based on:
(1) A pre-arranged call for help from a Provisional Government
set up by the insurrectionists (preferably to the OAS, although US action.
would not await formal OAS approval), or
(2) A call for help from the insurrectionists after a coup had
started without prior US concurrence, if the US determined that the in-
surgents met generally the criteria for support, or
(3) Intervention by local Soviet forces.
d. A coup should meet the following criteria to be supportable,
recognizing that specific criteria will depend upon the situation exist-
ent at the time:
3--
(1) Have some power base in the Cuban army or militia in order
to survive.
(2) Be prepared to establish a Provisional Government, however
rudimentary, with some sort of public claim to political viability to
provide an adequate political basis for overt US action (not required if
Soviet troops were clearly fighting Cuban patriots).
(3)
Neutralize the top echelon of Cuban leadership.
(4) Seize and hold a significant piece of territory, preferably
including Havana, long enough to permit the US plausibly to extend support
and some form of recognition to the Provisional Government.
e.
Policy Considerations.
For purposes of this paper, US policy af-
fecting US support to a revolt in Cuba is summarized below.
(1) The US does not contemplate either a premeditated full scale
invasion of Cuba (except in the case of Soviet intervention or the re-
introduction of offensive weapons) or the contrivance of a provocation
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SÉCRET SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_74.jpeg ---
13-00000
:
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET DITIVE
the US would be committed to the ultimate success of the coup.
tions would include:
These ac-
(1) The assumption by CINCLANT of command of all military
and para-military operations in Cuba.
(2) Prompt introduction of small groups of personnel for the
purposes of intelligence, reconnaissance, communications and liaison
with the insurgents, and provision of unattributable logistic support
by airdrop or submarine, In the event that the US delayed public an-
nouncement of the decision to support the coup, this assistance would
be provided in such a manner as to minimize public knowledge of active
US involvement in Cuba.
(3) When authorized by the President, direct the special team
to have the coup leaders proclaim a Provisional Government, if one has
not already been established, and request US and OAS assistance in order
to provide justification for a blockade and consultation within the OAS.
As soon as the request for help is received, the President would announce
publicly that the US will isolate Cuba by means of an air and sea blockade
to become effective at (time, date). The justification for this unilateral,
interim action would be based on Paragraph 3 of Resolution 2 of the Punta
del Esta meeting of Foreign Ministers until such time as the COAS/OC es-
tablished a collective basis for the blockade, as well as to insure that
support for either side is not provided from external sources. Actually,
the announcement would be designed to immobilize the Cuban Navy and Air
Force, encourage indigenous support for the insurgents, and reinforce a
warning to the Soviet Union not to intervene. (See Paragraph 7.a. below).
UNCLASSIFIED
5
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_73.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
TOP SECRET DESITIVE
(1) Introduce into Cuba a "special team" to obtain information
which would assist in making a decision to support the insurgents. This
team, composed of several persons representing DOD, State, and CIA, would
make contact with the coup leaders within twenty-four hours of the start
of the coup if the US had prior knowledge of the plan, probably later if
not. The report of the findings should be received by CIA within twenty-
four hours after the team's arrival on the island but this might not be
possible without prior knowledge of the insurgents' plans. In any event,
American
reliable reports from trained observers in Cuba would be of great value
to making a decision to intervene in order that the US would not commit
its prestige to the support of an uprising which might collapse prior to
the point at which US help has become effective enough to sustain and
expand it. (The special team, augmented as appropriate by CINCLANT,
would remain in Cuba as a liaison element with the Provisional Govern-
ment if the US intervened and would be directed to report immediately
to CINCLANT for operational control at the time the decision was made
to intervene.) :
(2) Order forces needed to establish an air and sea blockade
of Cuba to take assigned stations in preparation for implementing the
blockade; commence generating and positioning forces required for the
implementation of CINCLANT OPLANS 312 and 316.
C. A recommendation to intervene, based on a multiple source in-
telligence assessment including the special team's report, would be
made to the President. This would be the critical decision because,
once made, certain actions would ensue immediately and, henceforth,
IXMA
UNCLASSIFIED
4
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_72.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET QCITIVE
which could be used as a pretext for such action.
[
UNCLASSIFIED
(2) By the same token, it is not US policy to encourage un-
organized and uncoordinated mass uprisings since these would be too
easily crushed by indigenous Cuban military forces. The likelihood of
any spontaneous uprising surviving long enough to receive adequate US
aid is small unless it is a part of, or followed immediately by, a
planned and coordinated revolt led by a significant element of the Cuban
military forces.
(3) Once a revolt begins, the involvement of Soviet forces,
either tactical formations or troops manning air defense installations,
would result in immediate implementation of OPLANS 312 and 316.
3. Sequence of Operations. The concept of operations set forth in this
paper is based on the following general sequence of events:
a. Upon receipt of word that the dissident leaders have agreed to
and appear capable of meeting the criteria for US support, approval
would be given to commence the coup at the earliest practicable time.
(In the event that a coup were initiated without prior US knowledge,
the US would proceed as described below but introduction of the special
team into Cuba would probably be delayed and its task of gathering in-
formation made more difficult. Consequently, it might not be possible
for the US to make a decision to support the coup in time to commit
forces needed to sustain it
•
b. Upon receiving word that a coup had been initiated, either on
a pre-arranged basis with CIA or as a surprise to the US Government, the
US would:
3
UNCLASSIFIED TOP SECRET SINGERIVE
:
i

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_77.jpeg ---
13-00000
DEPARTM
DEF
EFENSE
SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING OFORN
•
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
13 March 1982EJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM FOR CHIEF OF OPERATIONS, CUBA PROJECTS DOCUMENT
Subject:
Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)
1. Reference is made to memorandum from Chief of Opera-
tions, Cuba Project, for General Craig, subject: "Operation
MONGOOSE", dated 5 March 1962, which requested brief but
precise description of pretexts which the Joint Chiefs of
Staff consider would provide justification for US military
intervention in Cuba.
2. The projects listed in the enclosure hereto are for-
warded as a preliminary submission suitable for planning
purposes. It is assumed that there will be similar sub-
missions from other agencies and that these inputs will be
used as a basis for developing a time-phased plan. The
individual projects can then be considered on a case-by-
case basis.
3. This plan, incorporating projects selected from the
attached suggestions, or from other sources, should be
developed to focus all efforts on a specific ultimate
objective which would provide adequate justification for
US military intervention. Such a plan would enable a
logical build-up of incidents to be combined with other
seemingly unrelated events to camouflage the ultimate
objective and create the necessary impression of Cuban
rashness and irresponsibility on a large scale, directed
at other countries as well as the United States. The plan
would also properly integrate and time phase the courses
of action to be pursued. The desired resultant from the
execution of this plan would be to place the United States
in the apparent position of suffering defensible grievances
from a rash and irresponsible government of Cuba and to
develop an international image of a Cuban threat to peace
in the Western Hemisphere.
4. Time is an important factor in resolution of the
Cuban problem. Therefore, the plan should be so time-
phased that projects would be operable within the next few
months.
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING; DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_8.jpeg ---
13-00000
Messrs. Aly and McBride
June 9, 1997
Page 3
equities in the records, declassify them, and simply hand them across the table to other
agencies for their review. It has been our own experience that sessions of this sort
greatly simply the review process by giving agencies the opportunity to speak with
each other and quickly to resolve questions.
Because these papers will need to be reviewed by the Board at its August 5-6 meeting,
we believe that an arrangement such as is proposed above will provide all agencies
with a full opportunity to identify their equities in the records and to make
determinations regarding the need for continued classification. If the Joint Staff and the
Department of Defense are agreeable to such an arrangement, the Review Board will
take the responsibility for contacting all non-military agencies with equities in the
records while the Joint Staff and DoD make arrangements for all appropriate military....
entities to be present.
We are, of course, very willing to consider other ideas or suggestions that you might
have. However, because the clock is ticking, it is important that we promptly develop a
plan that will provide all agencies with equities in these Joint Staff/JCS papers to have
an opportunity to review and declassify their equities.
I look forward to discussing this issue with you.
Sincerely,
A
T. Jeremy Gunn
General Counsel
Attachment
CC:
Steven D. Tilley, NARA
J. Barry Harrelson, CIA
Nina Noring, State
William Leary, NSC

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_75.jpeg ---
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED TOP SECRET BLIVE
SENSITIVE
(4) Complete positioning of forces for implementation of por-
tions or all of CINCLANT OPLANS 312 and 316.
d. The US would have the option of replying to a formal call for
help by either publicly announcing immediately its intention to support
the Provisional Government and initiating overt military operations, or
responding by establishing a blockade without admitting other support
for the coup. In the latter case, the US would, between the time of the
Presidential announcement of the blockade and public announcement of the
other forms of support, employ small groups of intelligence and recon-
naissance units, thereby providing visible evidence to the insurgents
that support is forthcoming and yet providing a facade of non-intervention
while the US consults with its allies to gain their political support.
At the same time, the US would be generating and positioning forces re-
quired for significant overt military operations. Upon publicly announc-
ing US intent to support the Provisional Government, the US would initiate
overt logistical and air support to the insurgents. There is a possibility
that this level of assistance and demonstrated US intent would be suffi-
cient to bring down the Castro regime, if the coup carried with it a
significant element of the Cuban armed forces. However, it is probable
that the US would have to introduce conventional forces incrementally as
required to sustain the uprising and should be prepared to and would im-
plement portions or all of CINCLANT OPLANS 312 and 316, as required.
4. Facts Bearing on the Problem.
a.
The Situation in Cuba. The Government has an excellent surveil-
lance network, both internally and with respect to the air and sea
UNCLASSIFIED
6
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_78.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN
5. Inasmuch as the ultimate objective is overt military
intervention, it is recommeded that primary responsibility
for developing military and para-military aspects of the
plan for both overt and covert military operations be as-
signed the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Aaig
WILLIAM H. CRAIG
Brig General, USA
DOD/JCS Representative
Caribbean Survey Group
Enclosure
Pretexts to Justify
Military Intervention.
in Cuba
2
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_79.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLIND
NOFORN
MEMORANDUM FOR CHIEF OF OPERATIONS, CUBA PROJECT
Subject: Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)
1. Reference is made to memorandum from Chief of Operations,
Cuba Project, for General Craig, subject: "Operation MONGOOSE",
dated 5 March 1962, which requested brief but precise
description of pretexts which the Joint Chiefs of Staff
consider would provide justification for US military inter-
vention in Cuba.
2. The projects listed in the enclosure hereto are forwarded
as a preliminary submission suitable for planning purposes.
It is assumed that there will be similar submissions from
other agencies and that these inputs will be used as a basis
for developing a time-phased plan. The individual projects
can then be considered on a case-by-case basis.
3. This plan, incorporating projects selected from the
attached suggestions, or from other sources, should be
developed to focus all efforts on a specific ultimate
objective which would provide adequate justification for
US military intervention. Such a plan would enable a logical
build-up of incidents to be combined with other seemingly
unrelated events to camouflage the ultimate objective and
create the necessary impression of Cuban rashness and
irresponsibility on a large scale, directed at other
countries as well as the United States. The plan would also
properly integrate and time phase the courses of action to
be pursued. The desired resultant from the execution of
this plan would be to place the United States in the apparent
position of suffering defensible grievances from a rash and
irresponsible government of Cuba and to develop an inter-
national image of a Cuban threat to peace in the Western
Hemisphere.
SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_80.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN
4. Time is an important factor in resolution of the Cuban
problem. Therefore, the plan should be so time-phased that
projects would be operable within the next few months.
5. Inasmuch as the ultimate objective is overt military
intervention, it is recommended that primary responsibility
for developing military and para-military aspects of the plan
for both overt and covert military operations be assigned the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Enclosure
Pretexts to: Justify Military Intervention
in Cuba
2
I
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_76.jpeg ---
13-00000
HANDLING
AUTEC
SPROTAL HANDLING
TOSOWG
CONTROL 0-13
T

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_81.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET & SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORM-
ENCLOSURE
PRETEXTS TO JUSTIFY US MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA
(Note: The courses of action which follow are a preliminary
submission suitable only for planning purposes. They are
arranged neither chronologically nor in ascending order.
Together with similar inputs from other agencies, they are
intended to provide a point of departure for the development
of a single, integrated, time-phased plan. Such a plan would
permit the evaluation of individual projects within the context
of cumulative, correlated actions designed to lead inexorably
to the objective of adequate justification for US military
intervention in Cuba).
1. Since it would seem desirable to use legitimate
provocation as the basis for US military intervention in Cuba
a cover and deception plan, to include requisite preliminary
actions such as has been developed in response to Task 33 c,
could be executed as an initial effort to provoke Cuban
reactions. Harassment plus deceptive actions to convince the
Cubans of imminent invasion would be emphasized. Our military
posture throughout execution of the plan will allow a rapid
change from exercise to intervention if Cuban response justifies.
2. A series of well coordinated incidents will be planned
to take place in and around Guantanamo to give genuine
appearance of being done by hostile Cuban forces.
a. Incidents to establish a credible attack (not in
chronological order):
(1) Start rumors (many). Use clandestine radio.
(2) Land friendly Cubans in uniform "over-the-fence"
to stage attack on base.
(3) Capture Cuban (friendly) saboteurs inside the
base.
(4) Start riots near the base main gate (friendly
Cubans).
3
TOP SECRET
SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_86.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLIKO
9 March 1962
NOFORN
COPY
OF
COPIES
SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION
REPORT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF REPRESENTATIVE ON THE i
CARIEBEAN SURVEY GROUP
to the
'JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
on
CUBA PROJECT (TS)
The Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, has requested
that he be furnished the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
on this matter by 13 March 1962.
EXCLUDED FROM GDS
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_83.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORM.
The terror campaign could be pointed at Cuban refugees seeking
haven in the United States. We could sink a boatload of Cubans
enroute to Florida (real or simulated). We could foster attempts
on lives of Cuban refugees in the United States even to the
extent of wounding in instances to be widely publicized.
Exploding a few plastio bombs in carefully chosen spots, the
arrest of Cuban agents and the release of prepared documents
substantiating Cuban involvement also would be helpful in
projecting the idea of an irresponsible government.
We
5. A "Cuban-based, Castro-supported" filibuster could be
simulated against a neighboring Caribbean nation (in the vein
of the 14th of June invasion of the Dominican Republic).
know that Castro is backing subversive efforts clandestinely
against Haiti, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and Nicaragua at
present and possible others. These efforts can be magnified and
additional ones contrived for exposure. For example, advantage
can be taken of the sensitivity of the Dominican Air Force to
intrusions within their national air space. "Cuban" B-26 or
C-46 type aircraft could make cane-burning raids at night.
Soviet Bloc incendiaries could be found. This could be coupled
with "Cuban" messages to the Communist underground in the
Dominican Republic and "Cuban" shipments of arms which would
be found, or intercepted, on the beach.
6. Use of MIG type aircraft by US pilots could provide
additional provocation. Harassment of civil air, attacks on
surface shipping and destruction of US military drone aircraft
by MIG type planes would be useful as complementary actions.
An F-86 properly painted would convince air passengers that they
saw a Cuban MIG, especially if the pilot of the transport were
to announce such fact. The primary drawback to this suggestion
appears to be the security risk inherent in obtaining or modify-
ing an aircraft. However, reasonable copies of the MIG could
be produced from US resources in about three months.
5
4.
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORM-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_82.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN
(5) Blow up ammunition inside the base; start fires.
(6) Burn aircraft on air base (sabotage).
(7) Lob mortar shells from outside of base into base.
Some damage to installations.
(8) Capture assault teams approaching from the sea
or vicinity of Guantanamo City.
(9) Capture militia group which storms the base.
(10) Sabotage ship in harbor; large fires
--
napthalene.
(11) Sink ship near harbor entrance. Conduct funerals
for mock-victims (may be lieu of (10)).
b. United States would respond by executing offensive
operations to secure water and power supplies, destroying
artillery and mortar emplacements which threaten the base.
.
c. Commence large scale United States military operations.
3. A "Remember the Maine" incident could be arranged in
several forms:
a. We could blow up a US ship in Guantanamo Bay and
blame Cuba.
b. We could blow up a drone (unmanned) vessel anywhere
in the Cuban waters. We could arrange to cause such incident
in the vicinity of Havana or Santiago as a spectacular result
of Cuban attack from the air or sea, or both. The presence
of Cuban planes or ships merely investigating the intent of
the vessel could be fairly compelling evidence that the ship
was taken under attack. The nearness to Havana or Santiago
would add credibility especially to those people that might
have heard the blast or have seen the fire. The US could
follow up with an air/sea rescue operation covered by US
fighters to "evacuate" remaining members of the non-existent
orew. Casualty lists in US newspapers would cause a helpful
wave of national indignation.
4. We could develop a Communist Cuban terror campaign in
the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington.
4
SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_85.jpeg ---
13-00000
IOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN
stations in the Western Hemisphere to tell the US what
has happened to the aircraft instead of the US trying to
"sell" the incident.
9. It is possible to create an incident which will make it
appear that Communist Cuban MIGs have destroyed a USAF aircraft
over international waters in an unprovoked attack.
.
a. Approximately 4 or 5 F-101 aircraft will be dispatched
in trail from Homestead AFB, Florida, to the vicinity of Cuba.
Their mission will be to reverse course and simulate fakir
aircraft for an air defense exercise in southern Florida.
These aircraft would conduct variations of these flights at
frequent intervals. Crews would be briefed to remain at
least 12 miles off the Cuban coast; however, they would be
required to carry live ammunition in the event that hostile
actions were taken by the Cuban MIGs.
b. On one such flight, a pre-briefed pilot would fly
tail-end Charley at considerable interval between aircraft.
While near the Cuban Island this pilot would broadcast that
he had been jumped by MIGS and was going down. No other
calls would be made. The pilot would then fly directly
west at extremely low altitude and land at a secure base, an
Eglin auxiliary. The aircraft would be met by the proper
people, quickly stored and given a new tail number, The
pilot who had performed the mission under an alias, would
resume his proper identity and return to his normal place
of business. The pilot and aircraft would then have
disappeared.
c. At precisely the same time that the aircraft was
presumably shot down a submarine or small surface craft
would disburse F-101 parts, parachute, etc., at approximately
15 to 20 miles off the Cuban coast and depart. The pilots
returning to Homestead would have a true story as far as
they knew. Search ships and aircraft could be dispatched
and parts of aircraft found.
HP SEGRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_84.jpeg ---
13-00000
NDLING NOFORM-
TOP SECRET
SECRET SPECIAL HANDLINO
I
7. Hijacking attempts against civil air and surface craft
should appear to continue as harassing measures condoned by the
government of Cuba. Concurrently, genuine defections of Cuban
civil and military air and surface craft should be encouraged.
8. It is possible to create an incident which will demonstrate
convincingly that a Cuban aircraft has attacked and shot down
a. chartered civil airliner enroute from the United States to
Jamaica, Guatemala, Panama or Venezuela. The destination would
route to cross Cuba.
be chosen only to cause the flight plan
The passengers could be a group of college students off on a
holiday or any grouping of persons with a common interest to
support chartering a non-scheduled flight.
a. An aircraft at Eglin AFB would be painted and
numbered as an exact duplicate for a civil registered
'
aircraft belonging to a CIA proprietary organization in the
Miami area. At a designated time the duplicate would be
substituted for the actual civil aircraft and would be
loaded with the selected passengers, all boarded under
carefully prepared aliases. The actual registered
aircraft would be converted to a drone.
b. Take off times of the drone aircraft and the actual
aircraft will be scheduled to allow a rendezvous south of
Florida. From the rendezvous point the passenger-carrying
aircraft will descend to minimum altitude and go directly
into an auxiliary field at Eglin AFB where arrangements will
have been made to evacuate the passengers and return the
aircraft to its original status. The drone aircraft
meanwhile will continue to fly the filed flight plan.
over Cuba the drone will being transmitting on the inter-
national distress frequency a "MAY DAY" message stating he
is under attack by Cuban MIG aircraft. The transmission
will be interrupted by destruction of the aircraft which will
be triggered by radio signal. This will allow ICAO radio
When
xxe app:
. 6
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_87.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLIK:
NOFORN
JUSTIFICATION FOR US MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA (TS)
THE PROBLEM
r
1. As requested* by Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff are to indicate brief but precise
description of pretexts which they consider would provide
justification for US military intervention in Cuba.
FACTS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM
2. It is recognized that any action which becomes pretext
for US military intervention in Cuba will lead to a political
decision which then would lead to military action.
3. Cognizance has been taken of a suggested course of
action proposed** by the US Navy relating to generated
instances in the Guantanamo area.
4. For additional facts see Enclosure B.
DISCUSSION
.5. The suggested courses of action appended to Enclosure A
are based on the premise that US military intervention will
result from a period of heightened US-Cuban tensions which
place the United States in the position of suffering justif-
iable grievances. World opinion, and the United Nations
forum should be favorably affected by developing the inter-
national image of the Cuban government as rash and irresponsible,
and as an alarming and unpredictable threat to the peace of
the Western Hemisphere.
6. While the foregoing premise can be utilized at the
present time it will continue to hold good only as long as
there can be reasonable certainty that US military intervention
in Cuba would not directly involve the Soviet Union. There is
* Memorandum for General Craig from Chief of Operations,
Cuba Project, subject: "Operation MONGOOSE", dated
5 March 1962, on file in General Craig's office.
.
** Memorandum for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, from
Chief of Naval Operations, subject: "Instances to
Provoke Military Actions in Cuba (TS)", dated 8 March 1962,
on file in General Craig's office.
2
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_88.jpeg ---
13-00000
i
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN
as yet no bilateral mutual support agreement binding the USSR
to the defense of Cuba, Cuba has not yet become a member of the
Warsaw Pact, nor have the Soviets established Soviet bases
in Cuba in the pattern of US bases in Western Europe. Therefore,
since time appears to be an important factor in resolution of
the Cuba problem, all projects are suggested within the time
frame of the next few months.
CONCLUSION
7. The suggested courses of action appended to Enclosure A
satisfactorily respond to the statement of the problem. However,
these suggestions should be forwarded as a preliminary submission
suitable for planning purposes, and together with similar inputs
from other agencies, provide a basis for development of a single,
integrated, time-phased plan to focus all efforts on the
objective of justification for US military intervention in Cuba.
RECOMMENDATIONS
8. It is recommended that:
a. Enclosure A together with its attachments should be
forwarded to the Secretary of Defense for approval and
transmittal to the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project.
b. This paper NOT be forwarded to commanders of unified
or specified commands.
c. This paper NOT be forwarded to US officers assigned
to NATO activities.
d. This paper NOT be forwarded to the Chairman, US
Delegation, United Nations Military Staff Committee.
3
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_89.jpeg ---
13-00000
22
DRAFT
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
Subject: Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)
1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the attached
Memorandum for the Chief of Operations, Cuba Project, which
responds to a request* of that office for brief but precise
description of pretexts which would provide justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.
2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the proposed
memorandum be forwarded as a preliminary submission suitable
for planning purposes. It is assumed that there will be
similar submissions from other agencies and that these inputs
will be used as a basis for developing a time-phased plan.
Individual projects can then be considered on a case-by-case
D
basis.
-
3. Further, it is assumed that a single agency will be
given the primary responsibility for developing military and
para-military aspects of the basic plan. It is recommended
that this responsibility for both overt and covert military
operations be assigned the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
MC
1. A.
* Memorandum for Gen Craig from Chief of Operations, Cuba
Project, subject, "Operation MONGOOSE", dated 5 March
->
1962, on file in Gen Craig's office
4
Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_9.jpeg ---
13-00000
JOINT STAFF PAPERS (147 documents)
Using broad topic guidelines provided previously by ARRB staff, the Joint Staff at the
Pentagon has reviewed 40 boxes of records of Joint Chiefs Chairmen Lyman Lemnitzer,
Maxwell Taylor, and Earle Wheeler for 1961-1964, as well as JCS central files for 1962
and 1963, and has flagged 147 documents which will enhance the historical
understanding of the Kennedy administration, and which some scholars will believe
may be relevant to the assassination.
Topics:
(1)
(2)
(3)
•
ICCCA (Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairs)
meetings regarding future U.S. policy toward Cuba.
Special Group (5412 committee) meetings and decisions; and covert
paramilitary operations against Cuba.
Cuban coup planning.
(4) Vietnam.coup planning, and discussion of Diem and Nhu.
(5)
OPLAN 34A (covert actions against North Vietnam).
(6)
U.S. military strength levels in Vietnam.
Apparent Equities:
Multiple agency equities appear to apply to virtually every document-usually
State, OSD and/or NSC. The Joint Staff has stated in writing that it is prepared
to expeditiously process these documents for declassification in collaboration
with agencies which have equities, and then accession the declassified
documents to NARA. Currently the Joint Staff is awaiting guidance from ARRB
staff on which of the tabbed folders we desire to have placed in the collection;
upon receipt of that guidance, they will commence declassification review.
Horne e:\wp-docs\Jointstaff.wpd
File: 4.0.4
1

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_91.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN
-
4. Time is an important factor in resolution of the Cuban
problem. Therefore, the plan should be so time-phased that
projects would be operable within the next few months.
5. Inasmuch as the ultimate objective is overt military
intervention, it is recommended that primary responsibility
for developing military and para-military aspects of the plan
for both overt and covert military operations be assigned the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.
W
AkA
6
Appendix to
Enclosure A .
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_92.jpeg ---
:
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN
ANNEX TO APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE A
PRETEXTS TO JUSTIFY US MILITARY INTERVENTION IN CUBA
(Note: The courses of action which follow are a preliminary
submission suitable only for planning purposes. They are
arranged neither chronologically nor in ascending order.
Together with similar inputs from other agencies, they are
intended to provide a point of departure for the development
of a single, integrated, time-phased plan. Such a plan would
permit the evaluation of individual projects within the context
of cumulative, correlated actions designed to lead inexorably
to the objective of adequate justification for US military
intervention in Cuba).
1. Since it would seem desirable to use legitimate
provocation as the basis for US military intervention in Cuba
a cover and deception plan, to include requisite preliminary
actions such as has been developed in response to Task 33 c,
could be executed as an initial effort to provoke Cuban
reactions. Harassment plus deceptive actions to convince the
Cubans of imminent invasion would be emphasized. Our military
posture throughout execution of the plan will allow a rapid
change from exercise to intervention if Cuban response justifies.
2. A series of-well coordinated incidents will be planned
to take place in and around Guantanamo to give genuine.
appearance of being done by hostile Cuban forces.
a. Incidents to establish a credible attack (not in
chronological order):
(1) Start rumors (many). Use clandestine radio.
(2) Land friendly Cubans in uniform "over-the-fence"
to stage attack on base.
(3) Capture Cuban (friendly) saboteurs inside the
base.
(4) Start riots near the base main gate (friendly
Cubans).
7
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN
Mi

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_90.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE A
DRAFT
NOFORN
MEMORANDUM FOR CHIEF OF OPERATIONS, CUBA. PROJECT
Subject:
Justification for US Military Intervention
in Cuba (TS)
1. Reference is made to memorandum from Chief of Operations,
Cuba Project, for General Craig, subject: "Operation MONGOOSE",
dated 5 March 1962, which requested brief but precise
description of pretexts which the Joint Chiefs of Staff
consider would provide justification for US military inter-
vention in Cuba.
2. The projects listed in the enclosure hereto are forwarded
as a preliminary submission suitable for planning purposes.
It is assumed that there will be similar submissions from
other agencies and that these inputs will be used as a basis
for developing a time-phased plan. The individual projects
can then be considered on a case-by-case basis.
XD
3. This plan, incorporating projects selected from the
attached suggestions, or from other sources, should be
developed to focus all efforts on a specific ultimate
objective which would provide adequate justification for
US military intervention. Such a plan prould enable a logical
build-up of incidents to be combined with other seemingly
unrelated events to camouflage the ultimate objective and
create the necessary impression of Cuban rashness and
irresponsibility on a large scale, directed at other
countries as well as the United States. The plan would also
properly integrate and time phase the courses of action to
be pursued. The desired resultant from the execution of
this plan would be to place the United States in the apparent
position of suffering defensible grievances from a rash and
irresponsible government of Cuba and to develop an inter-
national image of a Cuban threat to peace in the Western
Hemisphere.
5
Appendix to
Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_95.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET & SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN
:
7. Hijacking attempts against civil air and surface craft
should appear to continue as harassing measures condoned by the
government of Cuba. Concurrently, genuine defections of Cuban
civil and military air and surface craft should be encouraged.
8. It is possible to create an incident which will demonstrate
convincingly that a Cuban aircraft has attacked and shot down
a chartered civil airliner enroute from the United States to
Jamaioa, Guatemala, Panama or Venezuela. The destination would
be chosen only to cause the flight plan route to cross Cuba.
The passengers could be a group of college students off on a
holiday or any grouping of persons with a common interest to
support chartering a non-scheduled flight.
"
a. An aircraft at Eglin AFB would be painted and
numbered as an exact duplicate for a civil registered
aircraft belonging to a CIA proprietary organization in the
Miami area. At a designated time the duplicate would be
substituted for the actual civil aircraft and would be
loaded with the selected passengers, all boarded under
carefully prepared aliases. The actual registered
aircraft would be converted to a drone.
b. Take off times of the drone aircraft and the actual
aircraft will be scheduled to allow a rendezvous south of
Florida. From the rendezvous point the passenger-carrying
aircraft will descend to minimum altitude and go directly
into an auxiliary field at Eglin AFB where arrangements will
have been made to evacuate the passengers and return the
aircraft to its original status. The drone aircraft
meanwhile will continue to fly the filed flight plan. When
over Cuba the drone will being transmitting on the inter-
national distress frequency a "MAY DAY" message stating he
is under attack by Cuban MIG aircraft. The transmission
will be interrupted by destruction of the aircraft which will
be triggered by radio signal. This will allow ICAO radio
10
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_93.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET & SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFORN
(5) Blow up ammunition inside the base; start fires,
(6) Burn aircraft on air base (sabotage).
(7) Lob mortar shells from outside of base into base.
Some damage to installations.
(8) Capture assault teams approaching from the sea
or vicinity of Guantanamo City.
(9) Capture militia group which storms the base.
(10) Sabotage ship in harbor; large fires
--
napthalene.
(11) Sink ship near harbor entrance. Conduct funerals
for mock-victims (may be lieu of (10)).
b. United States would respond by executing offensive
operations to secure water and power supplies, destroying
artillery and mortar emplacements which threaten the base.
c. Commence large scale United States military operations.
3. A "Remember the Maine" incident could be arranged in
several forms:
a. We could blow up a US ship in Guantanamo Bay and
blame Cuba..
b. We could blow up a drone (unmanned) vessel anywhere
in the Cuban waters. We could arrange to cause such incident
in the vicinity of Havana or Santiago as a spectacular result
of Cuban attack from the air or sea, or both. The presence
of Cuban planes or ships merely investigating the intent of
the vessel could be fairly compelling evidence that the ship
was taken under attack. The nearness to Havana or Santiago
would add credibility especially to those people that might
have heard the blast or have seen the fire. The US could
follow up with an air/sea rescue operation covered by US
fighters to "evacuate" remaining members of the non-existent
Casualty lists in US newspapers would cause a helpful
wave of national indignation.
crew.
4. We could develop a Communist Cuban terror campaign in
the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington.
8
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORN

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_97.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLIKS NOFORN
ENCLOSURE B
FACTS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM
1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have previously stated*
that US unilateral military intervention in Cuba can be
undertaken in the event that the Cuban regime commits hostile
acts against US forces or property which would serve as an
incident upon' which to base overt intervention.
2. The need for positive action in the event that current
covert efforts to foster an internal Cuban rebellion are
unsuccessful was indicated** by the Joint Chiefs of Staff
on 7 March 1962, as follows:
11
determination that a credible internal
revolt is impossible of attainment during the next
9-10 months will require a decision by the United States
to develop a Cuban "provocation" as justification for
positive US military action."
3. It is understood that the Department of State also is
preparing suggested courses of action to develop justification
for US military intervention in Cuba.
* JCS 1969/303
** JCS 1969/313
12
Enclosure B
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NAFARH-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_98.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET
JCS 1969/321
12 March 1962
Page 2165
TO SEGKBF
SECKEY
COPY NO.
1
SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION
NOTE BY THE SECRETARIES
to the
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
on
NORTHWOODS (s)
A report* on the above subject is submitted for consider-
ation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
F. J. BLOUIN
M. J. INGELIDO
Joint Secretariat
* Not reproduced herewith; on file in Joint Secretariat
'
EXCLUDED FROM GDS
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING; DOD DIRECTIVE
5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
TOP SECRET
JCS 1969/321
2165
TOP SECRET

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_94.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLIN: NOFORN
The terror campaign could be pointed at Cuban refugees seeking
haven in the United States. We could sink a boatload of Cubans
enroute to Florida (real or simulated). We could foster attempts
on lives of Cuban refugees in the United States even to the
extent of wounding in instances to be widely publicized.
Exploding a few plastic bombs in carefully chosen spots, the
arrest of Cuban agents and the release of prepared documents
substantiating Cuban involvement also would be helpful in
projecting the idea of an irresponsible government.
5. A "Cuban-based, Castro-supported" filibuster could be
similated against a neighboring Caribbean nation (in the vein
of the 14th of June invasion of the Dominican Republic). We
know that Castro is backing subversive efforts clandestinely
against Haiti, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and Nicaragua at
present and possible others. These efforts can be magnified and
additional ones contrived for exposure. For example, advantage
can be taken of the sensitivity of the Dominican Air Force to
intrusions within their national air space. "Cuban" B-26 or
C-46 type aircraft could make cane-burning raids at night.
Soviet Bloc incendiaries could be found. This could be coupled
with "Cuban" messages to the Communist underground in the
Dominican Republic and "Cuban" shipments of arms which would
P
be found, or intercepted, on the beach.
6. Use of MIG type aircraft by US pilots could provide
additional provocation. Harassment of civil air, attacks on
surface shipping and destruction of US military drone aircraft
by MIG type planes would be useful as complementary actions.
An F-86 properly painted would convince air passengers that they
saw a Cuban MIG, especially if the pilot of the transport were
to announce such fact. The primary drawback to this suggestion
appears to be the security risk inherent in obtaining or modify-
ing an aircraft. However, reasonable copies of the MIG could
be produced from US resources in about three months.
9
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING
NOFARN-

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_96.jpeg ---
13-00000
TOP SEORETO SPECIAL HANDLING NOTORN
stations in the Western Hemisphere to tell the US what
has happened to the aircraft instead of the US trying to
"sell" the incident.
9. It is possible to create an incident which will make it
appear that Communist Cuban MIGs have destroyed a USAF aircraft
over international waters in an unprovoked attack.
a. Approximately 4 or 5 F-101 aircraft will be dispatched
in trail from Homestead AFB, Florida, to the vicinity of Cuba.
Their mission will be to reverse course and simulate fakir
aircraft for an air defense exercise in southern Florida.
These aircraft would conduct variations of these flights at
frequent intervals. Crews would be briefed to remain at
least 12 miles off the Cuban coast; however, they would be
required to carry live ammunition in the event that hostile
actions were taken by the Cuban MIGS.
b. On one such flight, a pre-briefed pilot would fly
tail-end Charley at considerable interval between aircraft.
While near the Cuban Island this pilot would broadcast that
he had been jumped by MIGs and was going down. No other
calls would be made. The pilot would then fly directly
west at extremely low altitude and land at a secure base, an
Eglin auxiliary. The aircraft would be met by the proper
people, quickly stored and given a new tail mumber. The
pilot who had performed the mission under an alias, would
resume his proper identity and return to his normal place
of business. The pilot and aircraft would then have
disappeared.
0.
At precisely the same time that the aircraft was
presumably shot down a submarine or small surface craft
would disburse F-101 parts, parachute, etc., at approximately
15 to 20 miles off the Cuban coast and depart. The pilots
returning to Homestead would have a true story as far as
they knew. Search ships and aircraft could be dispatched
and parts of aircraft found.
11
Annex to Appendix
to Enclosure A
TOP SECRET SPECIAL HANDLING NOFORM

--- Image 104-10333-10014_page_99.jpeg ---
}
13-00000
in
Helen
Put these all
under one tab as
m
tion
material used
W/ Thurston
Prepared 20 report
in conection
The
Col p
63
!