

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10182-10003
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME:
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY:
DATE.
RECEIVED
27 JULY 78
27 JULY 28
WIROGUE
20%-233477
BULKY
DATE
RETURNED
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME).
DAN HARDWAY
SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIAL
Dan Hardway
ED LOPEZ
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THis file

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_100.jpeg ---
14-00000
WIROGUE, former REDSOX Agent Candidate and AF Division
Agent, has been quitclaimed and resettled on the local
economy. This dispatch covers the WIROGUE case from Nay. 1962
to March 1964
Subject arrived in FRANKFURT MAIN on 22 May 1962 and
immediately made telephone contact with CABEZONE He had
been guaranteed a meeting with a Fran KUBARK représentative
who, he had been told, would explore KUBARK employment
possibilities for him. He in the meantime would be attempting
to market a telephone answering device which he had invented
and conduct an investigation into the disappearance of 30
million francs which had been misappropriated by members of
the Congolese Defense Ministry.KUBARK's reasons for establish
ing contact were dictated, however, by the need to relieve
Subject of his KUBARK supplied false Austrian passport in the
name of Reiner, the need to institute or suggest a course of
action which would encourage him to establish himself as a
contributing member of society and, above all, prevent his
return to the Congo.
Subject was met by Stephen R. LACKLEN and Roscoe MOSIEN
and put up in a safehouse. He was relieved of his documents
under the pretext that they were to be photographed and he
would not need them for the time being since he would be given
an identity document for use during the period of time he would
be in KUBARK custody. LACKLEN explained that as an administrative
officer he was interested only in taking care of his immediate
needs but soon however he would be introduced to one who's
business would be to work with him in an attempt to resolve his
problems.
Since it had been decided that Subject was primarily a
resettlement problem, Orme K. DARONNAT of HARVARD was
introduced to Subject. DARONNAT told Subject that he would be
working with him during his stay in Frankfurt while we were.
awaiting word on whether or not his services were needed by
the Government. Subject stated that his greatestwish was to
work for the "Company". If this was not to be, he hoped he
would be helped to legalize and immigrate to South America..
He emphasized his obligation to complete his mission for the
C.D.F. and claimed also he had to return to the Congo to
conclude his contract even if we decided to employ him. C. O.
told him our first order of business was to establish the need
for his services and in the meantime he could attempt to
market his invention.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
Naziva Ramona Veel vanden
378-0-82-0
WIROGUE
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
DATE:
10 March 1964
TIME:
1500 hours
PLACE:
Oderweg & Glauburgstr.
COMMENTS:
O
ORME K DARONNAT Case Officer
·
C. O met Subject as a result of a telephone call
requesting C. O.'s assistance Subject told C. O. that he
had gone to the local police revier and had tried to register
but that since he had neglected to take along a
a filled-out.
Anmeldebestätigung signed by the landlord he had been told
to go get the form, fill it out properly and then return The
police had looked at his deregistration slip with the 2 March
date indicated and had told him to waste no time since an
individual is required to deregister and re-register within a
period of 8 days and it was now the 10th of March. Subject
said that since his rental contract dates from January 1 and
that date is indicated on the registration slip, the police
will question why he waited so long to register. C. O. told
him that the answer was simple and that he wished Subject would
not bother him with such small problems. C. O. told Subject
to get an Anmelda form and fill it out and have his landlord
sign that he moved into the apartment on 1 March and explain
Handlands that he had been deregistered as of 2 March.
Subject said that he had already figured this out but that he
wanted an excuse to meet C. O. and talk to him.
He showed C. O. a Munich Konto check for 4,000 DM which
he had received for developing a device reported in previous
contact reports and went on to say that his business trip to
Munich had been reasonably successful. He had discussed the
development of several new devices with the director of the
Munich firm and was now in the process of working on another
device for the firm. He had made arrangements whereby he would
receive no payment for the new device but that the firm would use
to mark another invention of his for him.
its sales also asked Subject if he would be willing to
The firm had
come to Munich to live and work. Subject has agreed if the offer
turns out to be worth his while. C. O. congratulated Subject
and told him to continue the good work.
:
SECRET
13

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_102.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
I'
In July 1962 Headquarters advised HARVARD to provide
Subject with resettlement assistance including help in
immigrating to South America. Consequently, he was told
that although we appreciated his past service the economy
drive in Washington precluded employing him in any capacity.
He was bld that we were authorized to help him realize his
stated desire to immigrate to S.A. but that we would not be
able to "wave a magic wand" and have him settled there with
a job and a rosy future. He was told we would help him in
whatever areas we could but he would be expected to apply
himself to the problem and drop all plans to return to the
Congo.
Subject at this point was so discouraged by his inability
to sell his invention, the realization that his services were
not needed by KUBARK and weeks of inactivity that he willingly.
agreed to forego returning to the Congo and give up all
documentation in the name of Reiner if something could be
done to give him hope for the future.
--
Headquarters had recommended that Subject be resettled on
the basis of a backstopped Fremdenpass; however, Clarance
W. LEIBROCK (MKTOPAZ) and DARONNAT after much discussion of
the relative merits of the types of documentation available,
decided that only a Reiseausweis would stand up under the
investigation of immigration authorities and in addition, it
was felt that there was no guarantee Subject would be going to
South America. Therefore, if he were required to stay in
Germany for a prolonged period of time, it would be best to
provide him with complete FEDREP recognition processing
resulting in a Reiseausweis. A subsequent discussion with
ODIBEX Camp King reps confirmed this reasoning and, with the
concurrence of Acting Chief AD/FI, Subject was briefed by
Camp King representatives and then interviewed for political
recognition. He received political recognition on the basis
of a fabricated story in which he purported to be a Georgian
who defected from East Berlin while with a tourist group.
HARVARD felt that progress was now being made but a
temporary setback resulted from a query initiated in December
1962 by CAVATA to OCA Liaison Officer Bonn requesting full
traces, interrogation reports and all information available
on Subject. David R. REINBOLD of HARVARD informed OCA by
cable and in a subsequent visit to Bonn that Subject's name,
George SANDERS, story submitted for recognition, etc. were
complete fabrications to insure that WIROGUE received political
recognition and a Reiseausweis. It was explained that WIROGUE

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_101.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-2÷
HARVARD needed time to establish Headquarters interest
in the amount and type of assistance Subject should be given.
Also he was still an unknown quantity restless, and
and from
early cable traffic a potential troublemaker In view of these
considerations we were anxious to make his stay in Frankfurt
reasonably pleasant and reduce his desire to return to the
Congo; therefore, he was provided with subsistence and
confortable quarters
DARONNAT introduced David E. COULLIARD (MKTOPAZ) explain
ing to Subject that we would be wise to discuss documentation
for him since a long time might elapse before we had the
answer to Subject's possible employment with us and if the
answer was negative, we should be prepared to take steps to
legalize him. COULLIARD explained the merits of a Fremdenpass
and a Reiseausweis; 1. e a Fremdenpass could be obtained
without much difficulty but control and security would be
limited to the time Subject remained registered at the place
from which the Fremdenpass was issued. Therefore, the
Fremdenpass might well be a short range solution unless Subject
could get an immigration visa to desired country of resettle-
ment in a short time On the other hand the issuance of a
Reiseausweis could completely legalize Subject, but would
have to be issued on the basis of a false defection story and
should not be done unless absolutely necessary. Subject
stated that he hated Germans and no matter what happened would
not stay in Germany. He suggested that he be helped to
immigrate to the U.S., Canada, England, Australia, etc. c. o.
told him that with his criminal record of arrest and
imprisonment in France immigration to other than S.A. was out
of the question and even this was in doubt. He stated if
KUBARK employment was not possible he would hope to get legal
documentation in the name of de Panaskhet (his brother's
name) and take up legal residence somewhere.
'
By this time (June) HARVARD C.O. had an inkling that
Subject was not eager to return to the Congo but surmised
that his nuisance value might be such that he could parlay his
position into something better. HARVARD C.O. felt that
Subject's dislike for the Germans was real but was emphasized
by him in order to benefit as much as possible from a
prolongation of his new association with KUBARK.
stated that he was willing to discharge any responsibility
He also
to the Congolese by mail, thereby confirming C.O.'s suspicion
that he did not in fact want to return to the Congo and was
nereterested in prolonging his stay in FF/M and benefiting
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_103.jpeg ---
14-00000
was strictly a HARVARD agent resettlement case of no AIS ops
interest and not a routine CABEZONE case OCA stated that
the political recognition interview story had naturally drawn
the interest and attention of CAVATA
OCA
advised REINBOLD that CAVATA would be kept out of the case
by being told Subject was of continuing AIS ops interest and
HARVARD could go about its resettlement efforts.
Subject by this time had agreed to immigrate
to any
South American country with the exception of Argentina where
he claimed he had acquaintances who were not kindly disposed
toward him At first Subject suggested that he go on a
tourist visa and apply for immigration status after his arrival
Although this suggestion was quite sensible and valid DARONNAT
knew that his reasons were: 1) with a tourist visa, he had
visions of having KUBARK finance him from country to country
until he found exactly what would please him and 2) he knew
that with a tourist visa he could return to Europe without
having committed himself irrevocably to immigration status
with all its attendant responsibilities.
Available South American immigration data indicated that
a prospective immigrant would have to have personal qualifications
sufficient to make him an attractive prospect plus proof of
financial solvency sufficient to provide self-support at the
rate of $125 per month for two years. Headquarters approved
the expenditure of $3,000 for this purpose and discussions
with MKTOPAZ and Camp King resolved the necessary documentation
problems.
-
Fully documented and armed with the assurance that there
would be financial assistance available during his first.
months in South America, Subject applied at the local Colombian
Consulate for permission to immigrate. HARVARD had hoped that
letters of solvency and letters of recommendation would be
sufficient to enable Subject to process with a minimum of red
Stape. This was not to be and Subject was informed he could
only immigrate by processing through the Intergovernmental
Committee for European Migration (ICEM).
This problem was discussed with a cleared official from
Refugee Migration Section AMCONGEN, Munich, and the Chief of
CAMANTILLA HARVARD was informed that European refugees
immigrating to South America are processed through ICEM thereby
eliminating the need for individual countries to maintain
immigration offices and welfare staffs. Unfortunately, since

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_107.jpeg ---
14-00000
BIOGRAPHY OF GEORG FRANK SANDERS
IDENTITY:
FULL NAME:
Georg Frank SANDERS
B. NAME AT BIRTH: Gek
C
1
Georg SANDERS, as featured in my birth
certificate and all other Soviet documents
upon arrival in the West, I added to my first name the
However
name of my father Frank While in the USSR when the
patronymic was required, was referred to as Georg
Frankovich SANDERS
OTHER NAMES USED: I never used any other names but I
was called by my mother by a Georgian diminutive 'Zhori
and by my Russian friends 'Zhora' or 'Zhorzh
2
BIRTH:
A. DATE OF BIRTH: 25 July 1919
B.
PLACE OF BIRTH: Tiflis,
Tiflis, Georgia, USSR.
old Russian name.
official name is Tbilisi.
Tiflis is the
The Georgian as well as the present
Georgian
C. NATIONAL ORIGIN:
3. CITIZENSHIP:
4.
5.
A. AT BIRTH: Soviet. From 1917 (October Revolution in
Russia) until 1921, Georgia was governed, from the
downfall of Czarist regime, by Menshevists and partially
occupied by Turk, German and British troops. Only in
1921 did the Soviet government in Georgia officially
come to power. However, all persons born during this
transition period were classified later as Soviet citizens.
B. PRESENT CITIZENSHIP: Stateless
RELIGION: Orthodox (pravoslavnyy). Being raised in a godless
☐☐ society, I practiced my religion to a very limited extent in
my youth, and, due to existing conditions in USSR stopped
going to the Church in my adult life.
SOCIAL ORIGIN: Intelligentia (sluzhashchiy); my father was
an engineer, and my mother a white collar worker.
...
iyous

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_105.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-6-
DARONNAT told Subject that any South American immigration
thoughts should be shelved, that he should work and
himself in Germany and if he interded to immigrate in the
establish
future he would have to do it on his own
out that he would have to study and learn Russian, that any
It was pointed
professed Soviet refugee arriving in South America without
Russian would be immediately suspect by the emigres there.
-
ODIBEX authorities at Camp King had readily agreed that
Subject's original political recognition interview story, did
not provide the proper framework around which a decent legend
could be built. It was agreed that given a detailed legend
prepared to HARVARD's satisfaction ODIBEX could prepare a
new political recognition interview story and would remove
copies of the old story from the various FEDREP files and
replace them with the new
HARVARD's problem was explained to Chief, Stage I, CABEZONE
who assigned Gerald H. BESDINS to prepare a life story to
include a detailed escape from the Georgian S.S.R. to Turkey.
By
written, a new political recognition interview story prepared
1964, an excellent legend had been
and substituted for the old and to HARVARD's satisfaction for
the first time since Subject had arrived in HARVARD's custody,
the way was clear for a final resettlement.
Subject that the time had come to part company, that he was
DARONNAT informed
completely legalized and documented and was now in a position
to take his place in society Subject was given his legend
in German, complete legal documentation, one month's final
subsistence, and, since he had taken over a dropped CABEZONE
safehouse, was given dishes and various items to set up
housekeeping. He was quitclaimed and warned that he should
always keep in mind the consequences of any action on his
part which would result in having his fingerprints taken.
(Subject has often expressed the wish to immigrate to the
U.S. or even Canada or Australia and with his new identity
could probably do so. He has been told that these countries
do thorough security investigations and a check with Interpol
would disclose his true identity. HARVARD has established
that Interpol has no interest in Subject but we feel his
ignorance of that fact provides us with some control over
any steps he might take to emigrate from Germany.) Subject
has been told however that there is nothing to prevent him
from visiting other countries or even entering as a technical
representative.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_104.jpeg ---
14:00000
5-
ICEM is responsible for the immigration processing, it is
determined to pass only high level types and, therefore,
conducts stiff security investigations and gives detailed
interviews and job testing to all prospective immigrants.
By now it was apparant that if the disappointments and
frustrations connected with this case were ever to end a
reappraisel must be made to decide whether or not to go ahead
and subject WIROGUE to several possibly very searching
interviews. There was also the possibility he would be inter-
viewed in Russian (practically non-existant) and Georgian
(less than fluent). With these language deficiencies we
knew he would be immediately suspect if interviewed by any
recent refugee from the Soviet Union. We were hampered by
not being able to insure Subject's smooth-processing through
ICEM and by the fact that if we did help him to process we
would be making USEP ICEM and
ICEM and CAMANTILLA a party to fraud
with the danger of any slip-up causing embarrassment to KUBARK
ODIBEX and to the Federal Republic. We were not sure that
the aforementioned risks were worth taking and the problems
worth trying to resolve when it was obvious to HARVARD C.O.
that if Subject did get to South America and became disenchanted,
his first stop would be the local U.S. Consulate or Embassy
where he would ask to see the KUBARK representative and once
again force KUBARK to become directly involved in his personal
problems.
In spite of the hundreds of hours of Case Officer time, the
many discussions necessary to pull together adequate information
regarding immigration, etc., HARVARD was faced with the realiza-
tion that to prepare Subject for South American immigration
could take many more months. We were faced with the fact that
until Subject was provided with a detailed life history
containing the information required by prospective employers
and/or immigration authorities he was not in a position to be
resettled anywhere, let alone South America.
approach would have to be tried if HARVARD was ever to be in
We knew a new
position to satisfactorily sever Subject's dependence upon
KUBARK and reduce to a minimum the need for future contacts.
HARVARD C.O. felt that Subject should be told outright that
immigration to South America was not practicable under the
present circumstances and what would be done would be to
provide him with a detailed life history with enough factual
information needed for the filling out of any future job
applications, to stand up under detailed interviews, and, if
immigration ever took place, to satisfy immigration requirements.
A they pu
'T....

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_108.jpeg ---
1400000
-
"
6°
PROFESSION: Electro-technician, an equivalent of German
Ingeneur without diploma' (no college graduate)
LAST OCCUPATION Chief electrician (starshiy elekto-
tekhnik) with MIKHA-TSKHAKAYA RTS.
7
LAST RESIDENCE: Shota Rustaveli Street (ulitsa)
(private home of my common-law wife, Nina GANDELI) in
MIKHA-TSKHAKAYA, Kutaisi Oblast, Georgian SSR
#25
9
nee
MARITAL STATUS Single. From 1946 to the time of my escape
lived in a common-law marriage with Nina GANDELI
TAKTASHVILI, born 1920 When I first got to know her, she
was married to a post-office employee but her marriage was
an unhappy one. Her husband was much older and the
had been arranged by her parents, old fashioned farmers from
marriage
a distant village who were happy to marry their daughter off
to a relatively educated and well-to-do man. By the time I
When
was drafted into the service Nina and I were lovers.
I returned from the war, I moved in with her for her husband
had been killed in action during World War II and she lived,
with her daughter born during this time, in a small home
inherited from her husband. Her parents were dead, and she
worked as a mail carrier for she had very little education.
During the later years of our life together, I discovered
that Nina was having affairs with other men.
frequent quarrels at home, and made my life unbearable.
This caused
Finally, the woman became pregnant, and since I was positive
that it was not my child, I decided to end our relationship.
This was one of the reasons for my defection. I have no
children of my own.
PARENTS:
A.
B.
FATHER: Frank SANDERS, born circa 1885 in the Baltic
area, came to Russia proper circa 1910 and worked as a
civil engineer in the Baku, Batumi, and Tbilisi areas.
In 1918, he married my mother in Tbilisi.
1924 of an accident at his place of work.
He died in
remember my father at all, but knew from my mother that
I do not
he was a very good and kind man, and was well liked.
MOTHER:
Maria SANDERS, nee KANTCHELI, born circa 1885 in
a small village near the Azerbaydzhanian border in Tbilisi
Oblast She was an only child, and when her parents died
of old age, within a few years of each other, she moved to
Tbilisi and worked as a clerk in various private enter-
prises until she married my father. After her husband

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_109.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
10
died, she went back to work She changed her place of
employment several times and the only job I can remember
was her last employment as a cashier with the shoe-
repair shop (artel) on Sovetskaya Ulitsa in Tbilisi.
She died in 1934 of a heart attack.
BROTHERS AND SISTERS:
AND SISTERS: NO
None at present
born 1923 who died some six months after his birth
I had a brother Leon
11. OTHER RELATIVES: I knew that my father had relatives in the
Baltic area but our family had no contact with them and
12
did not know any of them I had no close maternal relatives
and the distant relatives in my mother's home village had no
contacts with my family disapproving my mother's marriage to
a foreigner' of another faith. I never visited the home
village of my mother
village of
CLOSE FRIENDS AND ASSOCIATES: I never had any real close
friends, but I was somewhat closer to the following persons
in town:
(1) Director of RTS, who was transfered in 1959 to Rustavi,
Georgian SSR.
(2) Rayon veterinarian who had his office in the rayon
veterinary clinic and travelled extensively in the rayon
área visiting collective farms.
(3) Club librarian (a girl friend)
13. SPECIAL SKILLS: I like to invent gadgets and built up a
relatively good home work shop
14.
LANGUAGES: Georgian
Russian
-
German
English
native
from school and contacts with
population in Russian speaking
area and in the service.
from school and residence in Germany
from Technicum, home study and
association with Americans in
Germany.
15. FINANCIAL STATUS:
None
:
7
BRA
Ricordo Ma

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_11.jpeg ---
1'4-00000
SE-C-R-E
REPORT CH CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DAYECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
3 March 1964
TIME:
1130 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr. 51
ORD
ORME K DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C O 0. met Subject and gave him his new Reiseausweis expiring
in 1966 and pointed out there was a restriction against going into
business for himself. He was given his Lohnsteurkarten for
62 63 and 64 plus his Abmeldebestätigung indicating his
deregistration from 145 Hohemarkstr to 51 Kuhwaldstr on 2 March
1964
He was told to go to the local Police Review and register.
Subject was given a copy of his new political recognition
interview story and was asked if he had any questions regarding
his legend. Subject replied that the story was so long he
could not possibly memorize it completely. C. O. told him that
the intent was to provide in detail any and all facts which in
the future might be of importance to him in the conduct of his
affairs.
Subject was asked about his plans for the future. His
answer was that the Director of the firm (reported in contact
report 17 February 1964) had invited him to come to Munich on
3 March 1964 to discuss, among other things, the possibility of
employing Subject in the engineering department. This plus the
fact that Subject has signed an agreement with BOHLER & co.
OPTICAL FACTORY, FF/M to act as an engineering consultant might
enable him to realize his ambition, i.e. to have a position
rather than an ordinary job.
C. O. quitclaimed Subject and wished him luck.
Subject asked that C. O. be sure to let the higher echelon
know he appreciates all that has been done for him.
Subject said that although official contact is at an end
he hoped that C. O. would not reject an invitation for a friendly
get together from time to time. C. O. replied that if business
matters permitted he would be glad to meet Subject.
- Subject jovially announced that they would probably meet
some day in the U.S. C. O. reminded him that any action on his
part which would involve the taking of fingerprints could have
dire consequence for him. C. O. went on to report what he had
told Subject months earlier and that is:
i:..
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_111.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
-5-
the end of second semester, and were graded by the following
system:
Otlichno (excellent)
4
Khorosho (good)
3.
Posredstvenno
(satisfactory)
2
Plokho (bad)
Ochen plokho (very bad)
The first three were passing grades.
In the spring of 1938, I took the final examinations, oral
and written, and was issued a diploma. It was a one-page
certificate and indicated that I had attended the technicum
for 4 years. It listed the grades I had received on the
various subjects and showed that I was graduated as an
electro-mekhanic..
"
All graduates were assigned to various places of employment
where they had to stay not less than two years. This is a
form of repayment for the money which the government spent
on their education. I was sent to the MIKHA-TSKHAKAYA M.T.S.
which in 1958 was converted into an R.T.S.
17. EMPLOYMENT HISTORY:
-
-
until defection
-
-
Mikha-Tskhakaya
1938 1941 and 1946
M.T.S. (Machine-Tractor Station), later converted into R.T.S.
(Repair Technical Station) Machino-Traktornaya and Remontno-
Tekhnicheskaya Stantsiya, respectively. Mikha-Tskhakaya,
referred to by the population simply as Tskhakaya, was the
rayon center of Tskhakayskiy Rayon being renamed so after the
famous Georgian Revolutionary Mikha Tskhakaya (the old name
of the town was Akhal-Senaki and Akhal-Senakskiy Rayon,
respectively). M. Tskhakaya was one of the organizers of the
Georgian Communist Party. The town has now about 10,000
population and is located on the RR line Samtredia-Sukhumi
(the main connection between Tbilisi and Moscow) with the
junction to Poti, the Black Sea resort. The town is located
between two large tributaries of the Rion River: Tsivi and
Terakhi Rivers. On the latter, located a few kilometers
from Mikha Tskhakaya, is situated a small hydro-power station
where I was a part-time employee upon my return from World
War II.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_106.jpeg ---
+4-00000
HARVARD as the final step in the IROGUE case has
arranged through
to be listed in
for Subject
so that any attempt
to immigrate to any country will bring him to the attention
of KUBARK and appropriate action can be taken.
In summary, everything has been done to insure Subject
successful future free from problems resulting from his
black association with KUBARK On the other hand, there
is
8565
0
reason for KUBARK to fear any future attempts by WIROGUE
to return to the fold under veiled threats to reveal all
With his criminal background he is aware that he can be brought
to the attention of French authorities
KUBARK'S position in the FEDREP is such that we have nothing
He also believes that
to fear from any action on his part
At the time of this writing Subject has a position as
research and development engineer with a Munich firm
allegedly receives DM 1500 per month, has an expense account
He
and is to receive a percentage of all profits realized from
the sale of any devices he develops. He expects to move to
Munich permanently about the end of May 1964

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_112.jpeg ---
14-00000
3-
-6-
At the M.T.S. (which was in 1958 converted into R.T.S.
after the machines and equipment were distributed to
the local grain and grape producing collective farms
with the sole responsibility of repair of these machines
left with R.T.S.) I soon became the foreman of a small
brigade of electro-mechanics responsible for the maintenance
and repair of electrical parts for those agricultural and
other machines. My starting salary was 400 or 500 rubles,
but it was increasing rapidly and when I was drafted into
the army, my salary was almost doubled by that time.
•
I
For personal reasons I returned to this town after my
discharge from the service, and obtained my old job.
also got a job as electro-technician with the above
described power station which supplied power for the town
1. and the rest of the rayon. I was assigned this second
job since there was a lack of qualified personnel after
the end of the war. I worked in the second shift at the
power station from 1947 until 1953 (when the position was
filled by a young graduate of Kutaisi technicum) earning
700 rubles in addition to my basic salary with the R.T.S.
Prior to my escape, my income was about 120 new rubles
before deductions. I also had some additional week-end
income from repairing electric household appliances,
radios, etc., for the local citizens. The old currency
:
:
was converted 10 to 1 in 1961.
G. 1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_110.jpeg ---
1400000
4.
:
16
EDUCATION HISTORY:
1927-1934
Trudovaya Shkola #107 (10-year school
desyatiletka) located on the corner of Prospekt Mikhaylovskiy
and Kirochnaya Ulitsa, in Tbilisi, (Presently PLEKHANOVA
and MARDZHANISHVILI Streets, respectively
-respectively.) Prior to 1927
it was the German Real Gymansium, but although converted
into a srednyaya shkola at that time, the instruction was
conducted in German, until 1930 when it changed to Georgian.
The majority of the students were Georgians
language instruction was given two hours a week and Georgian
Russian
one hour a week, until 1930
this school and then due to the death of my mother, ente
I completed seven years at
a technicum where I would be given board and quarters.
entered
techoicum where I
1934-1938
-
-
Tbilisskiy Elektro-Tekhnicum, located on Sovetskaya
Ulitsa in Tbilisi in a two-story building with a yard where
and the
the shops bidents hostel were located.
-
1934, I submitted an application to this school supplemented
In summer.
with the seven-year school certificate and a photo.
or August I passed the entrance examinations consisting of
Mathematics, Physics, written and oral Georgian and Russian
In July
and when I saw my name posted on the school's bulletin board
I knew I had been accepted. I paid no tuition and was given
a small stipend just enough for a bare living.
accommodations where I shared a room with three other students
The hostel
were free. On the first floor of the technicum building,
near the school office, was located a students cafeteria
where meals could be bought cheaply.
quality. The female students of the school lived in a small
The food was of poor
annex on the same street, two or three blocks from the
technicum.
For four years I studied physics, mathematics, history.
English, Georgian language and literature, Russian language
and literature, and from 1936 or 1937 - Constitution of the
Soviet Union. The general subjects were on a high school
level. Specialized subjects given at the technicum were
technology of metals, theoretical mechanics, strength of
materials, electrical machines, electro-techniques, electrical
gears (privody), electrical measuring instruments, drafting.
The students were also given military and physical training.
Classes ran from September to July of each year; summer
recesses I spent usually in near-by kolkhozes in a group
organized by the technicum to help out farmers with their
crops.
.
Examinations were held twice a year, prior to New Year and at

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_113.jpeg ---
14-00000
18.
-6a-
B
MILITARY HISTORY
c..
D.
:
DRAFT BOARD REGISTRATION:
received a notification from my rayon-voyenkomat
In the summer of 1939
(draft board) of my rayon and reported there on a
specified date before the draft board
sent in a group of other future conscripts to the
then I was
rayon polyclinic for a medical check-up
the first joint of my left thumb and index fingers
had lost
during an accident at the job, and when the findings
of the medical examinations were reported to the draft
board, I was rejected for active duty and deferred
into the reserve. At that time my pripisnoye
svidetelstvo (registration certificate) was exchanged
for the military booklet.
INDUCTION DATE: . On about 26 August 1941, I received a
notice instructing me to report to the rayvoyenkomat
on 27 August. I reported there and was notified to
report for induction on the following day. Then I,
with a group of either 80 or 100 conscripts from my
rayon, was put on the train and via Tbilisi travelled
to Baku, where the group was put in so called Salyanskiye
Kazarmy (Salyany Barracks) located on the outskirts
of Baku, on the highway to Salyany and the Iranian
border.
BRANCH OF SERVICE AND SERIAL NUMBER:
anti-aircraft artillery. I had no serial number
I served in the
(which is never issued in the Soviet Army)
BASIC TRAINING: I took basic training at Salyany barracks
in Baku for a period of two months. One month I took the
regular basic training, and the remaining month improved
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_114.jpeg ---
4-00000
E.
1
my qualifications as a car driver (I learned how to
operate an automobile while working on electric detail
on car repair at my M.T.S.).
M.T.S.). I can not recall the unit
number where I went through the basic training. At that
time the barracks were full of troops, basically infantry
and artillery units which rotated quite frequently.
SPECIALIZED COURSES: One month's driver's training as
mentioned above
RESERVE STATUS
Summer 1939.
Fall 1946
......
Rejected from the active duty for
medical reasons and given reserve
status
Discharged from the army and after
submitting my travel and discharge
papers to my Rayvoyenkomat was issued
a new military booklet which contained
an indication of my reserve status
was never recalled for military train-
ing or duty of any kind after my final
discharge from the service.
G. CHRONOLOGY OF MILITARY SERVICE:
I
In a group of other enlisted men, I was sent by train to
the 2nd battery of the 253rd separate anti-aircraft
artillery division (OZAD-ogne-zashchitnyy artilleriyskiy
divizion). Commanding officer of the battery was Lt. VAKS.
Commander of the vzvod upravleniya (administration platoon)
of the division was Lt. ENDELADZE.
ENDELADZE. Deputy divizion
4
commander for political affairs was Capt. CHOKHA and
politruk of my battery was Senior Lt. SAMARIN.
(Vladimir) GURGENIDZE was the commanding officer of OZAD
Major Vlado
and in February 1943 he was also appointed the commander
of the PVO (protivo-vozdushnaya oborona or anti-aircraft
defense) in the town of Michurinsk. The headquarters of
the division was located in Michurinsk
located in Michurinsk, while the battery
itself was stationed near the station TARASOVO near the
settlement of Konskoye, 7 km. from Michurinsk and 6 km.
from the six marshalling yards located at Kochetovka
station. A higher HQ was in Tambov and was at first
commanded by Col. CHERNYAVSKIY and later by Col. TSVETKOV,
a demoted General.
When I first arrived in Michurinsk, I was assigned as a
truck driver with the division's supply platoon (khoz-vzvod

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_115.jpeg ---
,1400000
8.
H
or khozyaystvennyy vzvod). commanded by Junior Lt. MAKAROV
but later I made the acquaintance of the above mentioned
ENDELADZE, a countryman, and through latter's intervention
was assigned as a personal driver to division commander
GURGENIDZE, also a Georgian, who was later promoted to Lt.
Col. and who kept me with him until I was discharged from
the service
PROMOTIONS AND DEMOTIONS After six months in the service
was promoted to yefreytor (corporal), and at the end
of my first year to Junior Sergeant. In 1944,
a sergeant
DECORATIONS:
.
None
was made
DATE OF DISCHARGE: I was discharged from active military
duty at the end of September 1946. I received my travel
orders and per diem funds at my unit in Michurinsk and
turned them in at my rayvoyenkomat.
another medical check-up by orders of the voyenkomat and
In 1955, I was given
discharged from the reserve for medical reasons (same as
before) and issued a so called belyy bilet (white ticket
or permanent deferment from service).
19. RESIDENCES FROM BIRTH:
1919
-
1926
1926
-
1934
1934
1938
-
1938
-
1941
Several addresses in Tbilisi
Tbilisi, Kirochnaya Ulitsa #35, an
apartment in a two-story house, formerly
a private house, later taken over by
the State ZHAKT (housing organization)
enterprise. After my mother's death,
I entered the local electro-technicum
and moved to the students' dormitories.
Tbilisi, Ulitsa Sovetskaya, # not recalled,
student hostel of Tbilisi Electro-Technicum.
.
Mikha Tskhakaya, Ulitsa Tsulukidze, #14.
Here I rented a room in a private one-
story house of a retired RR switchman,
Ilya LORDKIPANIDZE, who had to rent a
room in his house to boarders to
supplement his pension. Ilya's wife, Keto
(Catherine), for an additional charge
took care of my laundry and cooked for me
The couple had no children of their own
and treated me as their own son.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_118.jpeg ---
14-00000
11.
23
CONNECTIONS WITH ANY INTELLIGENCE SERVICES:
ne had any contacts with intelligence services.
I
organs.
I was
approached to serve in any capacity for Soviet security
24. DEFECTION AND ESCAPE:
A
B.
i
MOTIVATION:
In spite of being born and raised in a Communist country
I at an early age began to understand that real freedom
did not exist for the individual. It was also clear to
me that personal advancement did not depend on talent and
integrity but on the degree of one's political activity
I analyzed the Communist lies seeing reality so different
the war
from the official propoganda. During and after erent
"
I met people who visited Western countries and was able
to benefit from the particles of truth about a different
life there from the even sometimes very carefully worded
reports of those people. After I purchased a good radio
of 'Mir' make in 1956, I started to listen intensively to
foreign broadcasts. For a long time I cultivated the
idea of eventual escape from the USSR where I had no
relatives, no family, no possibilities for advancement
and a decent life. My anti-government sentiments which
developed as time passed became stronger and stronger,
and it became more and more difficult for me to hold
myself back and not to express them openly, which I did
anyway on several occasions. My involvment with the
militia and the unfavorable developments in my personal
life accelerated my plans for defection.
TECHNIQUES OF ESCAPE:
On 25 June 1962, three days after my experience with the
militia, I left my residence at 0700 as I normally would
to go to work. I walked out of town toward Samtredia.
I wore my regular clothing, had 80 rubles and a small
hand bag. I did not want to take the train being afraid
of militia surveillance After I walked two or three kilo-
meters on the highway, I got a ride on a truck from a
near-by collective farm which was headed in the same
direction. I got off the truck downtown in Samtredia and
paid the driver one ruble, then walked toward the railroad
station. Here I purchased the ticket for Batumi and
boarded the train at 1150 arriving in Batumi at 1415.
I
.I

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_116.jpeg ---
14-00000
1941.
1946
1946 1962
(until defection)
Army Service
Mikha Tskhakaya, Ulitsa Shota Rustaveli
#25 the private home of my common-law
wife, Nina-GANDELI. I was in love with
her and had an affair with her before
I went to war During the war, I found
out that Nina's husband was killed in
action and decided to return to Tskhakaya
to be near her. I moved in with Nina
and continued to live with her without
registering our marriage, at the local
ZAGS (registrar office for marriage
deaths and births). Although I insisted
on legalizing our union, Nina was always
opposed, being unhappy in her f
first
marriage, and wanted to feel free to end
the relationship at any time.
.
For the last several years Nina, as I
found out, was meeting other men during
my absence from home. A rift between.
us developed and grew more and more with
the passing of time Being deprived of
Nina's intimacy, I reacted by dating other
girls. We were on the verge of separation
many times but somehow made up. I tried
desperately to resolve our problems since,
when I still was very close to Nina, I
:
made anti-regime remarks on several
occasions and even planned a joint escape
from the USSR. I was afraid to aggravate
her too much in order not to push her into
possibly reporting me to the militia.
However, for some reason Nina did not
want to break off with me completely,
and one day announced that she was expect-
ing a child and wanted to legalize our
marriage. Since, I did not consider
myself the father of the child and
fearing black-mail by Nina, I decided to
speed up my defection which I was planning
anyway.
20. TRAVEL:
None except as described previously.
"

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_117.jpeg ---
14.00000
-10-
21. HISTORY OF ARRESTS:
22.
In June 1962, I was approached by the rayon militia at my
place of work and was taken to the militia offices where
nd wa
I was accused of being a
of being a long standing member of a
..
T
Georgian resistance group and of making anti-government
statements Although I had actually made such remarks on
occasions and was therefore guilty of the latter charge
noticed that the militia did not have sufficient information
on this subject and I denied all accusations. I could not
figure out who was behind the report. After prolonged
interrogation, during which I was extensively questioned on
my biography, parents, army service, contacts, etc.
released with the warning that I was not to leave the
area for the time being and that I would be contacted in the
near future by the militia. Except for this case, I was
never arrested or detained by militia or security organs
MEMBERSHIP IN POLITICAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS:
=
was
I never belonged to the Communist Party. I was urged to
join the Komsomol in 1937 while at the Tbilisi Elektro-
Technicum, and was sponsored there by two of my class-mates,
each of whom had more than two years of Komsomol standing.
I submitted the application to the local Komsomol yacheyka
(cell) and at a general meeting of the cell members mý
application was discussed and I told my life story and answered.
questions put to me by the members After I was accepted,
:
I received my membership card in about two months from the
city rayon committee of the Komsomol in Tbilisi after which
I had to attend meetings and pay very small dues. I never
held any official position with the Komsomol organization.
When I left Tbilisi, I had to deregister from the Tbilisi
organization and register with the local organization at my
new place of residence in Mikha Tskhakaya (usually referred
to by the local population simply as 'Tskhakaya'). The same
proceedure had to be repeated upon my departure to and
discharge from the army (deregistration from the old
Forganization and registration at the new place). Upon my
return from the army to Tskhakaya, I never registered with
the local organization again.
:
When I started to work in Tskhakaya, I was automatically
enrolled in the prof-soyuz (trade unions) where I was a
passive member paying my dues (something like 1% of my salary)
to the trade union organizer of MTS (prof-org) and attending
the obligatory meetings from time to time. I never took
any advantage of trade union members privileges such as the
cut-rate accommodations in rest homes (putevka v dom otdykha).
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
:
Any attempt to immigrate to the U.S.
would bring him to the attention of INTERPOL On the other
Canada, Australia, etc.
hand he could immigrate to South America but it would be
imperative that he first learn Russian if he is to pass himself
off as a recent refugee from the Soviet Union. C. O. said he
could see no reason to prevent Subject from visiting any country
or even entering as a technical representative. C. O. told him
that he is soundly, if not perfectly, documented and that we can
do no better and that he should never forget that his fingerprints
are the weakest links
CO 0. said good-by and parted company Case closed.
NOTE Normally HARVARD would provide a statement on one of our
cover unit stationary letterheads covering the period of time
Subject was in our custody and indicating thathe was more or
less professionally associated with the U.S. Army. Chief/HARVARD
and C. O. felt that unless Subject requests such a letter it
would be adviseable not to expose him to any more of our M.O.
We can be sure that if Subject needs such a letter he will
contact HARVARD.
* This of course is not true but does enable as to exercise some
control.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_119.jpeg ---
000
-12
found a safe place and slept until dark.
on foot from Batumi and followed the sea shore until I
I started off
reached the old shooting range about 1 1/2 or 2 km to
the south. Here I entered the water at about 2200 hours
after destroying my passport (the rest of my documents
were left at home) and burying my clothing and bag.
knew from previous study of a map at home that I had to
I
swim some 18 km. to Turkish territory. I swam all night
but
i
-
.L
and was not sure if I had reached, Turkish soil
being exhausted, I came ashore at about 0300 or 0400 hours
The point where I stepped out was on the gradient of
steep slope There I saw the silhouette of a hut and
went in There was an old discarded electric motor in
the hut From the Russian description on the motor
understood that I was still in Russia,
underbrush near-by and spent the rest of the night and
hid in the
the following day there. When it was getting dark, I
climbed the slope to observe the area.
while hearing voices in Russian coming from the shore.
I walked for a
I saw a dark object on the sea which resembled a submarine.
I continued walking near the shore and around 2200 or
2300 hours I entered the water and started to swim 3 km
off shore and then parallel to it.
range of a search light which swept the sea, I submerged.
When I came into the
When I came to the surface the search light
but nothing happened and I knew I had not been discovered.
swept over me
I continued to swim until I was completely exhausted, and
several hours before dawn went ashore and hid in a cave
opposite two big rocks in the sea near the shore.
remained there until morning.
I
up the slope where I saw a stone structure resembling a
The next morning I climbed
grave. I went in and observed the land around me from a
small opening. I saw a large village which I later learned
was Kemal-Pasha. I thought at first that a minaret was
an observation tower.
village of Sarpi, still on Soviet territory. I was very
I also presumed that this was the
thirsty and climbed down the hill to a near-by stream to
drink water. I met an 11 or 12 year old boy whom I
addressed in Russian but the boy drew away from me.
still not sure as to where I was, I walked in the stream.
for a while to hide my footprints. Then I hid in the
underbrush until it grew dark.
the village to its opposite end. There I entered the town
I came out and went around
and knocked on the door of a house situated on a hillside.
I called out in Russian. Even though I heard voices and
footsteps in the house nobody opened the door.
on the roof of a sort of stable in the courtyard and spent
I climbed
the night there. Early next morning I was awakened by
Being
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_123.jpeg ---
14-000
1144
S-B-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
DATE:
26 June 1942
TDE:
PLACE:
COMMENTS:
Tile 192813
sand
Avid
Case Officer
Sub at his apartment an
not co
an firm in Disveldorf is
while. Bubject indicated to 00
..
red that though the
n his invention, it
e
iren to suit
intils the Dermuis Lake Unire intentions to
incurred ility to soli hio int
1
tion he is no located by
Obvious
tion
ne
As the result of the above he commented that he is no
onxious
to go to South America or to any country where we can arist hime
legalizing. He even stated that since he has no funds from the
sole of his invention he is not anzious to return to the Congo
and any goodbye to his friends. Ha arated several times
previously that the only return he culd return would be to rec
nd that
his friends, that he has no business to t
be could
50
h
the herson 1
informed him that he made furarm
nxious
the feet that the
to no to Saneri.
cure 0
interested in taking of
his
Couro buck-round and send
the object is
ub] then brouch up
geldorf firm which he visited was very
n
him there as a business
strictly coa privi te individu
that he
could ch c
rt of the fir
no real wire to
uch
entative.
first he would ro
"ortir for a business
uld in hiri
r is available for us. He would
pince of oir choosing and be nilable
ser
"
on the
n G
in the Pro.
on
inlichte the no
refore rather go to b
hime he was taked to
that in the event we
Cut
Unold Jam. He commented how
Jeley his leaving Germung unduly (in his estimation) he mayo be
forced to take the offer made by the German firm.
clear that he did not mean this heathrant, but's straight
He made it
resettlement that ince by taking the job in the Congo he would
at least have a job, where by going to South Arict me hap no
job in wicht.
S.
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_124.jpeg ---
14-00000-
File
Ca 26 are 62 Sub called and said the
und
he had one to
Disselforf
Ton 22 June and is returning there for further
cussions on his invention on 27 June. He stated that
ecle there are interested in his invention and he hoped
SзXEIXAX
He was tax something could soon be worked out.
ented further that the person he
erson he brought
brought the letter to
etter of introduction mentioned in previous reports) is
German firm which is interested in the Congo and in
ntact with Congolese officials.
com
Subj mill call CO upon his return to Frankfurt on 27 June 62.
Subjill
David R. Rebell
david r reinbold

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_125.jpeg ---
T
14-00000.**
S¨E-C¨R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: VIROGUE
DATE: 22 June 1962
TIME:
0930
PLACE:
Ostenstr 1/9
COMMENTS:
Case Officer
from.
is
that due to
forded
it
Shot word was give
nedus economy drive
Subjs services were no longer needed. Moreover that were
highly apreciate of his pust performances and devotion to us.
Dubl, who Sivery culm throust the entire session, took the
news ver
very
well and stated that he had expected to learn his above
fate.
He comm
that now that he will no longer be in our employ
he is virt 1ly without means to support himself since the only
finds he has is are the amounts riven him by Mr Muren.
further thi unións he sold his ention to someone in Germany
He said
he not only would not be able to support himself but could also
not pay for his fare to South Amerion. (See below) It was Inf
therefore agreed that Sub should now dake every effort to
sell his invention here and to this effect he was given his
letter of introduction to the Dr in Düsseldorf where he
hoped to go today. If this does not succeed he will attempt to
contact a few of the larme electrical firms (auch on Diemenal
30 informed him that wo
hin
vill or et
subais
work
23 soon as
Bubj
is
with
the Fren
b
int for hit to di
11 his invention in
Alin in our
from us. Subje
in the future ho in
will
hether or not He
During Nic time he
inue to receive li
ving he will not be
043
14 every effort to ret his business,
ble.
at in the event he is
tin
re would inform our pec)
and ro
ake hin own
en care of
in
he
be
(over)

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_120.jpeg ---
4-00000
-13
noises in the courtyard I saw several women and two
men. I approached them and tried to make them under
stand by sign language that I had come from Russia
Meanwhile, some persons carrying sticks and axes came
into the courtyard I again tried to explain that I came
from Russia and wanted to remain in Turkey. The men
took me to the military authorities in Kemal-Pasha
When I dived into the sea in Batumi, I was wearing swimming
trunks, a belt and a pair of fins. There was a clasp
knife in my belt, a sack needle for stinging myself in
case of a cramp, my money in a nylon bag, three bars of
chocolate a compass and two Phenamin tablets to increase
my energy in a separate nylon bag. Except for the
occasional search light in the sea which I avoided by
diving, I did not encounter any other obstacles on my way
I did not inform anybody about my escape plans and did not
receive any help from anybody.
From Kemal-Pasha where I was given some clothing, I was
taken by car to Erzerum and from there by train to
Istanbul refugee center. I was there about a week and
was taken to Germany with the assistance of US authorities
on Friday 6 July 1962.
25 DOCUMENTS:
A.
PASSPORT:
•
I received my first three-year passport at #17 militia
(passport desk) office of Molotovskiy rayon of Tbilisi,
where I resided at that time. The passport was a single
sheet of paper with my photo and biographic data on it.
In 1939 I exchanged it for a new five-year passport at
the Mikha Tskhakaya rayon militia. This passport was of
a regular booklet form and along with my photo and bio
data, had a stamp of propiska (registration with militia)
which stated the date of my arrival in this town and my
residence address. When I was drafted to the army, I
turned in my passport and military booklet to the
rayvoyenkomat, and picked it up upon discharge from the
service. At that time I received a new five-year passport
{
from the same militia office with the propiska showing
my new address. In 1951, I exchanged my passport for the
new one which was valid for 10 years and which was
exchanged for another 10-year passport in 1961.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_122.jpeg ---
9-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
TIROGUE
DATE
5 July 1962
TDE:
1100
PLACE:
Ostendstral
Orde
Trons
Case Officer
COMMENTS: CO an
and
Minor went to see Subject in response to a
telephone call frozeni
from him. His major problem was that he was broke
and needed money CO gave him D 100.00 to eat on for a week but
Subject says that 8 possible to live on that amount
It is obvious that he is getting edgy are wants some action
from Hdqtrs. He was told that if
was told that if anything is to done for him in
Sedit will require correspondence between our people
Headquarters, that this will take time and there is nothing he can do
n S.A. and.
but wait. Subject thanked us for our help and said he is sorry to
cause us so much trouble.
12, 19, 26 July
subsistance paid.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_121.jpeg ---
$4-00000
14-
B
MILITARY BOOKLET (Toyennyy Bilet):
See paragraph 18 In the army I had a service booklet
(sluzhëbñaya knizika) which I turned into my rayon
voyenkomat upon return from the army
LABOR BOOKLET (Trudovaya Knizhka):
never possessed one since it was issued by one employer
and turned in to the new employer when an individual
changed employment Inever changed jobs

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_127.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
DATE:
19 June 1962
TIME:
1400
PLACE:
1/9
COMMENTS:
Case Officer
CO visited
jat
at his an and paid him D: 300 subsistence
(end reals) for the period 11 June through 30 June 1962.
Subj chated that the firm in Dortmund not interested in
his inentin stating that they would have to sell it so cheaply
they could not make any money on it.
Subj asked if there was anything new. CO informed him that the
ways of Has are often strange to understand but that there is
evidence that something is being done since a telegram was received
inquiring whether or not he had any reference as to where he
may prefer to lelize in South Americ He stated that be
did not care where he lived, the important thing being that he
would like to work for us anywhere in the world.
Loss where he claimed he could be of some use.
He even mentioned.
00 informed sub that for future planning he would like to know
that in the event we would assist him in legalizing in S. America,
but informed he that he would no longer have a job with us,
whether he could get along on his own. He stated that though
this would make him unhappy he would naturally have to make the
beat arran tements possible.
Tubi touth oncerned about his future and indienting that he
dislikes sitting around doing nothing nevertheless was not over
bearing or demanding.
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_126.jpeg ---
14-00000
...
en
nclude hat"
nst
stop off in Geneva and
ile Bub
ess (and on the
ale to take care of his matter
would upon his retum given him a per
nd Austrian rácsot, but in the na
Seover
every effort o
with
the Defence
Congo to
Minister
ibly
South
and
icult
Subi stated
the
asistance.
04
e then
business to take.
act, cunt was juste ruse
legalize and establish citizenship.
is or would be very than
nkfur
tioned that he does not really have
for
15
up for the Ÿzrgixx Defence Ministr
to
does not sell is invention he has
event he
Conco since he will not have sufficient funds to pay for his retur
no intention to
no
eturn to the
trip to Germany.
ret him out of the country. Moreover that in th
1.
•Subi promised to call CO upon his retur
00
rom Düsseldorf.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_13.jpeg ---
14-000 00
S-E-C-R-E-T
REFORT ON CONTÁCT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
28 February 1964
TDE:
1130-hours
PLACE: Kuhwaldstr. 51
162
ORME K. DARONNO
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O. dropped in to see Subject and paid him DM 800
final subsistence for March. C. O. emphasized that this
would be the last time Subject would receive any money and
that he must now arrange for a new source of income
Subject laughed and said he had the impression C. O. was
anxious to get rid of him and also seemed to have doubts
as to his ability to take care of his financial problems.
C. O. laughed in turn and said he would indeed be glad to see
Subject on his own and added that he had no doubts re:
Subject's ability to get money but that he is only hoping Subject
would use methods acceptable to society (chuckle).
Since Subject had both English and German versions of his
legend, C. O. took the English copy with the explanation that
if Subject should submit a Lebenslauf, in connection with a
job application, the German version would be more appropriate.
C. O. took Subject to lunch and dropped him off in the
city after promising to see him on the 2nd of March.
C.O. picked up Subjects Reveausweis and told him it would
be returned to the authorities and a new one
would be
issief. This would eliminate the need for a renewal
until 1966.
SECRET
CALL 1
•Excladed: from automatk
Comagrating and
_ declassification

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_129.jpeg ---
14-20000
S-E-C-R E-T
REPORTACH CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE:
DATE:
June 1962
TIME:
1000
PLACE
Ostends
to Apt 9
ORME K DARONAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
He was
Case Officer and a TSB Representative dropped in to see Subject and
informed him that we had notified Headquarters the results of our discussion
regarding documentation and had informed them of our and his thinking con-
cerning this problemas told that there was nothing else to tell that
now we could only wait to get an answer with their suggestions"
offered his old Austrian passport and identity papers so he could go to
Geneva and Brussels to finish his assignment for the Congolese Defense
Ministry. Subject said he was in no hurry to do this and therefore refused
the passport, stating that he was hoping to hear from Dortmund regarding
his invention within the next two weeks and this assignment he had to do
could be done on his way back to Leopoldville. It is obvious that Subject's
primary worry or concern is to get a job with us. Subject asked if his
identity card could be renewed. Case Officer took the card and had it
re-validated until 24 June and returned it to Subject.
Subject was also told that the cook would be taken from him for
several weeks and that Case Officer would give him 100 CM to eat on.
Subject was quite surprised and pleased.
Subject suggested that we investigate the possibility of his immigrating
to Australia, Canada', England, etc. Case Officer said that his chances were
nil, that the entrance requirements to these countries were extremely difficult
to satisfy and that his best bet is probably South America.
Case Officer promised to return as soon as he had some free time or
as soon as he heard something from Headquarters.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_130.jpeg ---
1400000
:
7
S-B-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR.
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE: 29 May 1962
TIME:
1200'
PLACE:
1/9 Ostendstr.
Qame
f
ORNE KA DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS
Case
er a D.
introduced as Mr. Joseph LORTON, went to
see Subject with the express purpose of discussing the various possibilities
that might be available to document Subject as legally as possible.
Subject told CO that he had made contact in Dortmund under the name of
de Panaskhet, whith a firm that was interested in his invention.
They told
him that since he did not have a patent this would pose a problem and offered
him 5,000 DM for his idea. Subject told them he would give it to them outright
for $10,000. Although they did not refuse his request, they told him they
would think it over and discuss it with the boss and would have to make a
patent search which would take up to 4 weeks. Subject told them to go ahead
but not to try to pull any funny business since there were ways of proving
that the idea was his and he could offer it to other firms. Subject will
now wait to be contacted by this. firm.
Case Officer told Subject that we had not heard anything from Headquarters
regarding his re-employment by us. He asked if there was some way of finding
out approximately how long it would take. CO told him this was very difficult,
☐ but we would see if we could make an educated guess.
Subject asked for a key to the mallbox since he will be receiving mail
from his friends in Dortmund and possibly from the firm which he has contacted.
then began discussing documentation with Subject along the following
lines:
The type of documentation he would receive if any would depend upon the
final decision from Headquarters as yet not received. We solicited suggestions
from Subject as to solutions to the documentation problem. Apparently his
immediate desire is to receive back his Austrian pass, finish: his business
in Europe and return to the Congo to clean up matters there.
☐

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_132.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
S-B-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
24 May 1962.
TIME:
1100 hours
PLACE: Ostendstrass
FORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
:
COMMENTS:
"
LACKLEN introduced DARONNAT as Mr. Murmann and explained
that he would now be working with Subject
lunch DARONNAT explained that he and Subject would be working
On the way to
together to resolve whatever problems. Subject might have.
During lunch, conversation was limited mostly to Subject's
views on the Congo situation and the solutions.
expounded at great lengths on the matter of the Congoless and
He also'
the Belgians whom he would appear to dislike intensely.
.-
Upon return to the apartment Subject was told that we
would like to get him West German documentation with political
recognition. He was told that if we are successful he would be
documented as legally as possible under the circumstances and
would be in a position to begin a new life. Subject was very
pleased but a bit skeptical that we could accomplish this.
was asked to think carefully about his desire to use the name
He
David de Panaskhet since, if he was wanted for breaking parole
in France, there could be a watch list for that name and it
could be assumed that since Panaskhet was his brother's name,
Subject might assume that name some day. Subject stated that
someone was confused about his status in France, that he was
not on parol and had, therefore, not done anything wrong in
leaving the country. He said that the worst that could happen
if he returned there would be for the authorities to ask him why
he had left the town he had been confined to.
be that since they had restricted his movements he had left the
His answer would
country (C. O. doubts that this is true but
questions).
not raise any
=
-
Subject was given a DRC identity card, number 596, in the
name of David de Panaskhet. Since HARVARD is awaiting Headquarters
proposa regarding Subject's resettlement, C. O. suggested that
he investigate the possibility of marketing his telephone
answering device.
GAJW!
Erdod alk
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_128.jpeg ---
-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
DENOGUE
DATE: 14 June 1962
TIME:
11444*/*// 1100
4444/8/11100
PLACES Annex A
COMMENTS:
Case Officer
Subject called to inform CO that he had heard
from Tortmund regarding his invention but money had not
been mentioned and he was going there to see if he could
get some actions
CO told him that Hdqtrs had informed us that they
would try to have an answer to our questions and problems
the end of this week.
He was also informed that CO would be leaving on Saturday
on vacation and that Kr. Minor would be working with him
until CO returned. He was assured that Hinor was aware of
all the problems and knows the case thoroughly.
Subject might return on Saturday but if not he will contact
Minor next week.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_133.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Subject stated that a woman friend of his in Dortmund
knew him by his Russian name but if he visited her she would
ask no questions which would pose a security or otherwise
embarrassing problems for us…The man he proposed to visit in
Dusseldorf to whom he had a letter of introduction, would have
to be told his name is Reiner CO told him to do what he
thought necessary but to be careful since it would appear that
his case was complicated enough without complicating it further
C O told Subject to call him when he returns from Dortmund
and Dusseldorf
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_131.jpeg ---
14-00000
'A
SECRET
The other or long range alternative would be he would like to have
especially if he is nou employed by KUEARK documentation of a legal nature in
the ramc of David de Panasheth which he could surface anywhere in the
world and take up legal residence.He himself suggested the possibility of
our agency determining some South American country where suitable bribertes
are possible. He could acquire citizenship in a short period of time if
possible, without his personal appearance there and acquire a passport from
that country. Obviously this would mean finding some country where bribery
would a affect quick acqusition of citizenship and passportHe did not
express any particular eagerness to accept German documentation unless hea
could get a Reiseausweis. We discussed the relative merits of a Fremdenpass
and a Reiseausweishe told him that if we could obtain a Fremdenpass with
a minimum of change in his true life story but the acqusition of a
Reiseausweis would mean telling a big lie which he personally took a d
view but said he would do it if necessary We said we thought we could
get him a Fremdenpass without too much difficulty from controlled authorities
but the effect of control and security of this passport would be limited to
the time he remained registered at the place from which the Fremden ass was
issued Therefore the issuance of a Fremdenpass might well be a short
range solution only unless he could obtain an immigration visa to the
desired country of resettlement without a six-month period. In any event
the decision to obtain a Fremdenpass would rest on the decision made ty
Headquarters as to the final disposition of his case. In the event a te
Fremdenpass was to be obtained Subject was requested to sign all necessary
forms and submit all necessary information for the completion of these forms,
which he did. He was reassured again that no steps will be made to acquire.
a Fremdenpass without prior consultation with him.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_134.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONTACT REPORT
DATS: 23 May 1962, 1000 to 1145 hours
SUBJECT:
KIROGUE
KUBARK OFFICER: Stephen R. LACKLEN
1 As requested by AD/FI, LACKIAIN met WIROGUE as scheduled in the
CABELONE apartment at 100 hours on 23 May 1962. Roscoe H. HOSIEN accompanied
to witness the meeting and assist later if necessary, in reconstruction of
needed facts.
brew
al message to Washington
He said
said
LACKLET told hIROGUE that he had sent that this message
with the highlights of the 22 May meeting
probably could not be acted upon prior to 23 May due to the time difference
between Washington and Frankfurt. He was advised
Be was advised
for some word today it was more probable e vou at while we hope.
not get an answer
prior to 24 May. MIROGUE said that he understood the time delays in
awaiting replies from Washington and expressed his satisfaction with out
efforts to assist him.
3. LACKIEN told him the documents which he had loaned us were being
photographed and would be returned to him as soon as possible.
WIROGUE said he was in no hurry for his documents and for us to keep them
as long as be needed then. He said he hated being coursed up in this
apartment and hoped that we could give him an interim pass which would
permit him to go out on the street in Frankfurt. LACKLEN said that he was
trying to obtain this pass as soon as possible, the photo WIROGUE gave
22 May was not proper with the sport shirt and that he would have MOSIEŃ
take more pictures the afternoon of 23 May with coat and tie. for the pass.
LACKLE explained that the delay in issuring the pass was simply getting another
operational activity to release one of their cover passes for WIROGUE.
LACKLEN assured him that we were moving as rapidly as possible and would
make every effort to have a pass for him by 1700 23 May. LACKLEN said ir
this was not possible he would phone him at 1700 and probably have the pass.
the following morning, the morning of 24 May. WIROGUE agreed.
"
:
4. WIROGUE said that he wanted to travel to Dortmund and Dusseldorf
to talk to people there about his telephone answering device. He would
like to have a pass to facilitate this trip which would take two or three
days. LACKLEI suggested WIROGUE "sit tight" until we had some information
from Washington before making this trip. In this exchange of conversation
WIROGUE mentioned that he preferred not to use his Austrian passport in
Germany. LACKLEN took this entree and asked KIROGUE why didn't he get
a real passport as it obvious WIROGUE felt the Austrian passport was reaching
the end of its usefulness. WIROGUR said he wanted more than anything else
to Anng legalize himself in any country, even the Congo. He said that he
knew US citizenship was impossible because of his criminal record. LACKLEN
asked him if he had ever considered German citizekšhip (NOTE: In the
discussion of a permanent recognition document, LACKLER #adeliberately
confused the terms economic recognition, citizehsip, political recognition, etc.)
WIROGUE was not willing to spend the required five years residency in Germany
to attain citizenship or for that matter in any other country. LACKLEN
mentioned that some German documentation might be obtainable, however, he knew.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_137.jpeg ---
14-00000
RYBAT
SECRET
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
CONTACT REPORT 22 MAY 1962
.
WIROGUE phoned Mr. Schneider (HORDWIN) at FC 553001
at 1420 hours 22 May advising that he was at the Frankfurt
Main Bahnhof and wished to meet Mr. Schneidor Mr. Schneider
requested IROGUE call back in ten minutes. HORDWIN advised
Acting AD/FI that WIROGUE was in Frankfurt and requested what
action was desired Acting AD/FI advised HORD IN to arrange
plak up, billet subject in CABEZONE blown apartment and await
further instructions. HORDWIN advised IROGUE when he called
back that Mr. Miller (LACKLEN) would meet him at 1500 hours
at Track 15, Main Bahnhof. At Aoting AD/FI's request LACKLEN
first reported to his office to review passport photograph
of WIROGUE and get further instructions. Acting AD/FI
instructed LACKLEN to take him to the apartment and if
feasible, obtain the passport and with extreme caution
elicit any information regarding WIROGUE's purpose for coming
to Frankfurt. DOOS came through the office at this time and
was advised that LACKIEN and CABEZONE were carrying out this
task.
2 WIROGUE was met as planned. He advised that he had
already checked into the Hotel Savoy across the street.
LACKLEN believed it most feasible to obtain the passport if
he were in a CAREZONE apartment. If he were in the hotel,
ho may be reluctant to give up the passport, etc. VIROGUB
was concerned at first about burdening us by living in our
apartment but agreed to do so. Stephen R. LACKIEN using
alias Mr. Edward Miller and Roscoe MOSIEN using alias Mr. Dale
drove subject in CABEZONE car to #1 Oatend Strasse, apartment 9.
This nice one-bedroom apartment with kitchen and bath and a
living room is regarded as blown and is scheduled to be dropped
in Piscal 1963. The telephone number there is 492813. Contact
instructions given WIROGUE in a FRAN cable were Mr. Schneider's
number PC 553001 (ops phone located in HORDWIN's office) and.
the Annex A Guard Post number Northern 8766 for after hours.
Both of these numbers should be changed as soon as feasible.
-b
3. As soon as WIROGUE was settled in the apartment;
LACKLEN described himself
described himself as an administrative officer who
was meeting him seeing that he got settled in the new apartment
and attending to any of his immediate needs. LACK LEN made it
very clear that he had no authority to give him any committments
or resolve his case. LACKIEN said, however, that ho would like
RYBAFT
GRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_136.jpeg ---
14-00000
J
9
Coucerning WIROGUE's request that we ask Washington approval to
explore possibility of obtaining German recognition for him, he requested
that if documentation could be obtained he would like it in the name of
David De Punaskhot" He said this was his brother's legal name in France.
WIROGUE suggested also that the document include that he was also known
previously as "David Taitzichvili" which is his real and true name from
birth
:10. MIROGUE continued to show a complete satisfaction and contentment
vith our handling of his case so far. LACKLEY reiterated that we were
rolling along as rapidly as possible and would make every effort to ge
an early reply from Washington To further substantiate our desires to
give him every assistance LACKLES offered to furnish him with the addresses
of the Telefunken, Grundig and other electric factories in west Germany
Where he might sell his invention. WIROGUE said he would appreciate this,
but that he also had letters of introduction to several firms in Dorti
and Dusseldorf. At the conclusion of the meeting, LACKLEN summed up the
timetable for action as follow:
a.
b.
d.
MOSIEN
would return at about 1400 today to take needed
pass photos and bring him some French reading material.
WIREGE WIROGUE agreed to remain in the apartment until
such a pass was available. LACKIEN would do his best to
get it by 1700 today, but if not, early on 24 May.
When a pass was available WIROGUE could work out arrangements
to go to and Dortmund, etc., however, it may be that his
andamuk
debriefing on the Congo, on documentation, etc. was of sufficient
importance that he should be debriefed immediately.
To make his stay in the apartment as comfortable as possible
he should suggest to the maid the types of foods he particularly
enjoys.
We would continue to press Washington for authority needed to
resolve his case.
ri
He is
11. WIROGUE understood the program and was quite satisfied.
cooperative and LACKLEN believes will continue to be so as long as a
logical and plausible program is presented. LACKLEN's next contact with
WIROGUB will be by telephone at 1700 hours on 23 May when he will tall
him the pass is not ready and arrange for another contact at 1030 hours
he
on 24 May.
Sephew
Racklen
STA HAIR. LACKLEN
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_135.jpeg ---
**
:
4-00000
nothing about this LACKLEN said that certainly with the large numbers
of refugees that have come to best Germany in the past 15 years, there
must be some means of getting documentation. LACKIER said if WIROGUE
would officially ask him for German recognition that he would forward
this request to washington. LACKLEN made it very clear that we here in
Germany could make no commitments, could do nothing on this matter or make
another move on this case until we hear from Washington
Washington. WIROGUE said
he clearly understood this and asked for German documentation in exchange
for his Austrian passport, etc.
5
must some by
Later in the conversation WIROGUE mentioned he had a moral obligation
to carry out his assignment for the Congolese army here in Europe and
said he must give them some information bymaid withing three weeks LACKLEN
d WIROGUE how would a German recognition affect his dealings with the
Congolese ar y VIROGUE said he must return to the Congo for two or three
days to conclude his contract with them He would require his Austrian
passport for this
6.
service
1
Throughout the conversation MIROGUE used the words”; if "the
does not have anything for me It is LACKLEN's opinion that
WIROGUE believes it quite possible that KUBARK may not have an assignment
for him and that if we can provide him with usable recognition documentation
he might be effectively terminated. The one problem still unclear, however,
is how to obtain his agreement not to return to the Congo. The matter that
we retain his Austrian passport will prevent him from returning to the Congo,
but it will be very desirable to find a plausible reason by which we can
make him see he must not return to the Congo.
7. LAKKLEN requested and WIROGUE agreed to remain in the apartment
until the pass could be obtained. LACKLEN arranged for a maid to come in
and cook his meals. French magazines were provided. It is believed he will
be content in the apartment through 24 May.
8. Throughout the meeting WIROGUE continually most expressed
his views on the Congo, documentation procedures and techniques, etc.
LACKLEN suggested that he had very useful information that might be of
** interest to an expert in these fields and asked if he would be agreeable
to talking with someone. WIROGUE said he would be very pleased to do so.
LACKLEN made this pitch as a contingency by which we might tie up WIROGUE
for several days in "important" debriefings and delay Ex his pressing
for an immediate solution. We might also describe delays as being caused
by Washington baloney, something of which he claims to be very
familiar with. During these debriefings it would be possible also to learn
the extent fo his knowlegeability of KUBARK operations, personalities, eta.
LACKLEN believes WIROGUE has quite an extensive knowledge of KUBARK. He
has been handled by many people, in many places and in many ways.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_138.jpeg ---
14-0000
RYBAT
to take back to his boss some general informationan on
what WIROGUE wanted in Frankfurt. This led KIROGUS tố
begin a los discussion of his problems in the Corgo and
Service
his desires for a new assignment with the
LACKLEN was trying to build up sufficient rapport by letting
him talk, to find an opening by which he could obtain the
passport.xx
L
MIROGUE advised that he had come from Leopoldville
to Brussels and was fortunate enough to catch a connecting
flight 22 Haj
May to Frankfurt. He explained he was in Frankfurt
to talk
alk with some old contacts in ropes they might have a job
for him. he asked if Miller (LACKLEN) knew Mike
him no. He said that he had arranged with the Congolese
attempt to trace
Minister of Deferme to come to Euro, Mike, LACKI told
30,000,000 Francs (sic) - rate 65/1 US Dollar which had been
given to the Ministry of Defense officials to purchase airplanes.
This money had been deposited in Swiss banks and disappeared.
He showed LACKLEY an Crder de Mission dated 17 May 1962 signed
by the Secretary General of the Congolese Foreign Ministry
identifying him for travel for the Congolese Government to as
WIROQUE sounded resolved
many countries in Europe as necessary.
to complete this mission. He claimed, however, that this mission
was simply a cover for his Frankfurt contact with the "Service".
WIROGUE talked about himself for about an hour and
Some of the highlights of this are:
5.
a half.
->>>
a. About the investigation a Belgian citizen, who
had been in the Congo before independence and who was now
a colonel in the Congolese Arity and alose to General Mobutu
had gone to the American embassy to "name-check" WIROGUE.
WIROQUE said he was not worried about this investigation
(NOTE: LACKIAN was not asking these questions, but simply
listening to WIROGUS and attempting to lead up to the
request for his passport). WIROGUE felt the only way this
Belgian colonel could pin him down was by contacting the
Viennese diplomat representative in Leopoldville and
through him checking WIROGUE's Austrian passport number.
He mentioned that his friends in the Surete and Department
of Defence Ministry had asked him for a police certificate
from Austrial MINOGUE sa no problem in furnishing this.
He could fabricate this with no trouble and was confidant
it would to sccepted because the Congolese officials would
have no
practice of throwing recorda away.
✓ her such document to compare it with and had s
RYBAP

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_139.jpeg ---
14-00000
YBAT
CRET
LACKLEN asked WIROGUE what he would like to do,
interested in. WIROGUE replied
what type of work he was interested in.
in a 30 minuto presentation that he liked outdoor work
with military operations like commando work. He liked to
work inmilitary uniform or civilian clothes. He hated
desk work LACKLEN naked him if he would like to work in
Communist China, Russia, Indochina, or Germany. WIROGUE
replied by saying it depended on the job. He wanted a
challenge He said just give me a mission and I'll carry
it out. Don't worry about his being arrested, killed or
whatever, Euney was not important. LACKLEN again emphasized
that he had no job in mind, but simply was trying to determine
what WIROGUE was interested in, what his experience had been,
and that he might be qualified to do. LACKLEN said that he
would take this information back to his boss, who would
have to contact Wishington. We here in Frankfurt knew
nothing about his and had no file of his experience
12
LACKLEN asked WIROGUE suppose there is no
assignment for you? What would you like to do then?
WIROGUE continued discussing his interest in working
for the "Service" and indirectly made it clear he was
not interested in a normal job and life. LACKIEN asked
him what country he was a citizen of. WIROGUE stated
that he was stateless. LACKIEN asked him what country
he would like to live in if he had his chaise, if he
could have anything he wanted where would he like to
go what would he like to do in a normal life? WIRCOUS
replied he didn't know, but he hated Germans and gaha
gave the impression that he was very content with his
present status. At no time was it discussed or did
WIROGUE mantion employment, entry, or citizenship in
the U. S. He also stated he could not go back to France
que to some trouble which he then described as the bank
robbery.
d. LACKIAN asked him if he was actually receiving
a salary from the Congolese Government. He said he was
making about 15,000 Congolese Francs per month and this
was not enough to live decently on. He said his job in
addition to this investigation he was conducting on
the embezzlement of money that he was in effect the
chief of the Congolese Air Force.
SECRET
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
24 February 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
a clean erake with
1 C. O. and Sam Markowtiz met with John Wilms, Special
Liaison Advisor to the 513th MI Group at Camp King -to discuss
certain problems connected with the E case. Co. told
John that we are going to attempt to make
Subject this coming Friday but there were a few loose ends which
had to be cleared up before we could take this final step
CO. said that in reviewing the new political recognition
interview story
story, we had noted that the new story did not
incorporate the name change of Subject's father from Simon
Sanders to Frank Simon Sanders. C. O. asked if the new copy
would have to be changed or replaced. John made a note of what
the change of nane should really be and told C. O. have all
the new copies changed to read Frank Simon Sanders. John said
that this sort of thing happens from time to time%; that it is
just a simple error and will raise no eyebrows.
2 C. O. then brought up the point that Subject's
Reiseausweis will, expire in October 1964 and we and Subject were
when he went
wondering if Subfect would run into any prob, we and Subject were
to the Polizei Presidum to get a Reiseausweis renewal. John
said that there would be no problems that he could see: but to
make sure that there is no slip-up, we should pick up Subject's
current Reiseausweis and if Sam prepares the necessary Antrag,
John will get us a new Reiseausweis within one or two days, dated
with a current date. C. O. said he would pick up Subject's
Reiseausweis and give it to Sam this week and Sam will prepare
the necessary papers for a new Reiseausweis, plus a 1964
Lohnsteurkartear with Subject will be accomplished this coming
a deregistration slip. If this works out,
our plans to be
Friday.
brought up
-
3. C. O, then posted out the BFV's interest in Subject
in late 1962 and mentioned to John we had received a query from
Bonn indicating the BFV's interest in Subject, and contained
what looked like excerpts from Subject's political recognition
1
SECRET
Erekte min sa
Cons
FDMR ZÁKA
FL

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_141.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
RYBAT
CRET
It would be preferable to have it done on 23 hay during the
regular working day. VIROQUE said that he was in no rush for
take our time, but he would
the documents and please go ahead, take ou
like to have them back within 48 hours. He then said what
would appen if I went out on the street tonight without docu-
ments? LÄCKLEN said that he could possibly give him a simple
identity card as working with the American Army here, but
in the apartment tonight, there
requested that WIROGES stay
was food there and we would bring in anything he wanted, such
as magazines, etc. IROGUS said that he was tired, that he would
take a bath and stay in the apartment. LACKLEN said that he
if
would return at approximately 1000 hours 23 Kay and 1f WIROGUE
had any problems call the emergency number he was given.
3320
his
7. LACKLEN observed as WIROGUE was going througn
wallet, attache case and pockets for various documentation
which he thought we would like to photograph, an approximate
9" x 11" inch photostat black copy which identified as his
birth certificate. During the course of the conversation,
WIROGUE also said that he had a driver's license your people
gave me with my passport and while mentioning his commission
as a major in the Congolese army that he was able to obtain
this rank by showing his German Army papers (slo). WIROGUE
did not indicate whether these papers were given him or he
obtained or made them himself.
8. Incidentally, VIROGUE indicated he would go into
Soviet Russia on his om, accomplish any mission we wished
to assign him and return. All at his own risk, provided we
would "help him". "He also indicated exceptional interest in
making phony documents, oto.
.
LACKLEN did not ask him for these documents since they had
apparently been provided by our "Service" and would be inconsistent
with at the story of the "Service's" interest in photographing
It is believed that at the
Congolese documents, stamps, etc.
right moment WIROGUE could be taken elsewhere for lunch or some
other excuse, that he would probably leave thene documenta in his
However, when
apartment and we could take possession of them.
this is done and he misses them, the die is cast.
ECRE
RYBAT

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_142.jpeg ---
14-00000
CRET
RYBAT
SUBJECTIVE COMMENTS HY LACKLEN
LACKLEN feels his approach as a personnel officer
representing his boss trying to get facts which might be
helpful in finding out what could be done to help WIROGUE
was effective in establishing a proper rapport with him.
LACKLEN repeatedly emphasized that he lacked authority
information, eto to make any committments or be any more
than an intermediary to his boss, who himself was an
intermediary with Washington. LACKLEN emphasized his
sincere interest in helping WIROQUE.
--
2 LACKLEN believes WIROGUE has been very satisfied
with his first contact in Frankfurt and will be cooperativo
until we advise him his passport, etc, will not be returned
3. WIROGUE impresses LACKIEN as being the man described
and possessing the personality and other traita described in
the cables. It is believed that he can be a dangerous and
difficult individual when "crossed" It is suggested that a
clear course of action be established prior to advising
WIROGUE his documents are not being returned as it is quite
likely WIROGUE has planned or will plan his own course of
action.
4. LACKLEN believes that WIROGUE can be delayed for
two, three, four, or even more days with the story these
documents, the stamps are terrific, "our people" are really
excited about them and we would like to keep them longer, we
would like to send them to Washington, eto. It may be that
WIROGUK could be given an identification card similar to but
not identical with in those provided defectors describing the
individual as in Army custody as an interim measure and clearly
marked with an expiration date.
2
5. It may be important to note that prior to meeting
WIROQUE LACKLEN had only read FRAN 0404 and made a 30 second
perusal of LEOP 3939 and DIR 11783. LACKLEN did really not
retain any data from the two incoming messages and certifies
that he did not lead WIROGUE in the conversation but simply
let him talk with in the purpose of establishing rapport and
obtaining the passport if possible.
6. At approximately 1755 hours LACKLEN returned to the
DCOS's office and briefed the DCOS and Acting AD/FI on the
meeting. Auting
Onal outine PI sent an Ops immediate cable to LEOP.
DIR and routine toR FROB. A meeting was scheduled in the
AD/FI office at 0830 23 May. Acting AD/FI's request LACKLEN
notified Deputy Chief MKTOPAZ to attend the meeting. Axxix
Deputy Chief MKTOPAZ came to CABEZONE at 1945 hours 22 May
and inspected documents. ECRETRYBAIT, CABEZONE Was adyathew R. Lucklen
ised
!

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_143.jpeg ---
14-00000
4
LEBENSLAUF VON GEORG FRANK SANDERS
IDENTITÄT:
2.
VOR UND NACHNAME:
B.
C.
Georg Frank SANDERS
NAME BEI GEBURT Georg SANDERS, wie ersichtlich.
aus meinem Geburtsschein und allen anderen sowjeti-
schen Dokumenten. Bei Ankunft in den Westen habe ich
jedoch den Namen meines Vaters, Frank meinem Vor-
nanen beigefügt. In den USSR, als das Führen des Va-
tersnamens verlangt war, wurde ich Georg Frankovich
SANDERS genannt.
ANDERE NAMEN: Ich habe niemals irgendwelche andere
Namen benützt, aber meine Mutter hat mich mit der
georgischen Abkürzung meines Namens "Zhori" gerufen
und meine russischen Freunde haben mich "Zhora" oder
"Zhorzh" genannt.
GEBURT:
A...
B.
C.
GEBURTSDATUM: 25. Juli 1919
GEBURTSORT: Tiflis, Georgien, USSR. Tiflis ist der
alte russische Name. Der georgische Name als auch
der gegenwärtige offizielle Name ist Tbilisi.
NATIONALITÄT: Georgier
3. STAATSBURGERSCHAFT:
A.
BEI GEBURT: sowjetische. Von 1917 ( Oktober Revo-
lution in Russland ) bis 1921 war Georgien nach dem
Fall des zaristischen Regimes von Menschewiken re-
giert und teilweise von türkischen, deutschen und
britischen Truppen besetzt. Erst 1921 kam in Georgien
die sowjetische Regierung offiziell an die Macht.
Jedoch wurden alle Personen die während dieser Über-
gangszeit geboren wurden später als Sowjetbürger aner-
kannt.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_140.jpeg ---
14:00000
LE MOTO
DYBAT
CRET
WIROGUE described his abilities in demolitions,
commando work, liquidations, air operations and navigation
He also said that
and
ho
general knowledge of spy work".
he was an expert on documentation and that he liked to work
He also
making phony
mentioned his telephone answering device which he made for
$8.00 and wished to go to Dortmund, West Germany to attempt
to market it.
mentioned oumentation, water marka, etc.
t.
to
During the odourse of the above conversation WIROGUB
showed: LACKLEN several documents to substantiate his claims
LACK LEN
of employment by the Congolese Government,
decided that the documentation interest of the "Service"
in these Congolese documents would be the best entree
obtain his passport.
LACKLEH attempted to display
shallow inflated interest in the water marks and stamps
Bone.
on the documents as an Admin Officer who had had.
week operational course and was really trying to get the
documents to impress his boss. With each document LACKIEN
commented about their simplicity and easy forging possibilities
ax their
and how much
the documents people would love to get
hands on this. WIROGUE loaned LACKLEN the following documents:
6.
(1) Passport (Austrian) 090058
(2) Return Sabena Air Ticket 8096473 to Leopoldville
(9) Congo D. ivers Permit
(4) Carte d' Indenitite D'Etranger
(5) # Pass from MINDEF/Congo re Technician
Status (Civilian)
(6) Health Certificate
(7) Laisses Passer # 71-58. Congo Pass from
Leopoldville to Brazzaville
(8) Laissez Passer as Major, Congo Aray
(9) UN Pass (access to Royal Hotel, Leopoldville).
(10) Congo Certificate of Vaccination
(11) Order do Mission (17 May 62) by Secretary
General Foreign Ministry
(12) Order de Mission to Brazzaville to apprehend
a man signed by Joseph MATUBA, 26 March 62
(13) Attestation he is Attache (Technician) Congo
Army by M. Kalongo, Sec. Gen. Ministry of Defence
28 December 61
LACKLEN asked if he could borrow these documents so they
could be photographed as he was sure they were of extrame value.
LACKLEN said that inasmuch as these documents were WIROGUE' &
property if he insisted he would have someone photograph the
documents tonight and bring them back as fast as possible, but
CRET
RYBAT
!

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_145.jpeg ---
14-00000
Weltkrieg gefallen war. Sie lebte mit einer Tochter
die währendessen geboren worden war, in einer beschei-
denen Wohnung die sie von ihrem Mann geerbt hatte. Ihre
Eltern waren tot und sie arbeitete als Briefträgerin
da sie nur eine bescheidene Ausbildung genossen hatte
Während der letzten Jahre unseres Zusammenlebens fand
ich heraus, dass Nina Beziehungen zu anderen Männern
unterhielt. Das war der Anlass zu Streitigkeiten und
das Zusammenleben wurde unerträglich. Dann erwartete
sie ein Kind und da ich sicher war dass es nicht mein
Kind war entschloss ich mich unsere Beziehungen zu
beenden. Das war mit ein Grund für meine Flucht. Ich
habe keine eigenen Kinder.
ELTERN:
A. VATER: Frank Simon SANDERS, geboren ungefähr
1885 im Baltikum; er kam ungefähr 1910 ins russi-
sche Gebiet. Er arbeitete als Ingenieur in Baku,
Batumi und Tbilisi Gebiet. Er starb 1924 an den
Folgen eines Arbeitsunfalls. Ich kanu mich an
meinem Vater nicht mehr erinnern, aber ich lernte.
von meiner Mutter, dass er ein guter und gütiger
Mann war der allgemein beliebt war
B.
MUTTER: Maria SANDERS, Mädchenname KANTSCHELI
geboren ungefähr 1885 in einem kleinen Dorf in
der Nähe der aserbaidshanischen Grenze im Tbilisi
Oblast. Sie war das einzige Kind; als ihre Eltern
im hohen Alter innerhalb weniger Jahre starben
zog sie nach Tbilisi und arbeitete in Büros von
verschiedenen privaten Unternehmungen, bis sie
meinen Vater heiratete. Nachdem ihr Mann-starb
fing sie wieder an zu arbeiten. Sie wechselte
ihre Arbeitsstelle verschiedene Male und die
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_144.jpeg ---
14-00000
B
2.
GEGENWÄRTIGE STAATSBURGERSCHAFT:
Staatenlos
RELIGION Orthodox (unwoslawni ). Da ich in einer
gottlosen Gesellschaftsordnung aufwuchs habe ich meine
Religion in meiner Jugend nur sehr begrenzt ausgeübt
und habe später als Erwachsener vollkommen aufgehört in
eine Kirche zu gehen wegen der bestehenden Bedi
in den USSR.
GESELLSCHAFTLICHER URBPRUNG:
ngungen
Intelligenz slushaschtschi)
Mein Vater war ein Ingenieur und meine Mutter gehörte
Gruppe der Kopf-Arbeiter
6.
Beruf
7
.
zur
Elektro-Techniker, das würde ungefähr in Deutsch-
land einem Ingenieur ohne Diplom, d. h. ohne Universitäts-
bildung, entsprechen.
A. LETZTE STELLUNG: Chef Elektriker ( starschi elekto-
technik) bei MICHAL ZCHAKAJA RTS.
LETZTER WOHNORT: Scota Rustaveli Strasse ( ulitsa ) Nr. 25
( Wohnung meiner Lebensgefährtin Nina GANDELI ) in MICHA-
ZCHAKAJA, Kutaisi Oblast, Georgien SSR.
8. EHESTAND: Ledig. Seit 1946 bis zu meinser Flucht lebte
ich mit Nina GANDELI zusammen, geboren 1920, Mädchenname
TAKTASCHWILI. Als ich sie kennenlernte war sie mit einem
Postangestellten unglücklich verheiratet. Ihr Mann war
viel älter als sie und die Ehe war von ihren Eltern ge-
plant worden. Die Eltern waren altmodische Bauern von
einem entlegenen Dorf die froh waren ihre Tochter mit
einem verhältnismässig gebildeten und wohlhabenden Mann
zu verheiraten. Zu dem Zeitpunkt da ich in die Armee ein-
berufen wurde war Nina meine Geliebte. Als ich aus dem
Krieg zurück kam zog ich zu ihr, da ihr Mann im Zweiten
.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_146.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
10.
11.
12.
13.
einzige Arbeitsstelle an die ich mich erinnere
war die letzte Stelle die sie innehatte als
Kassiererin in einem Schuhreparatur-Geschäft
(artel) in der Sowetskaja Ulitsa in Tbilisi
Sie starb 1934 an einem Herzschlag
GESCHWISTER: Keine Lebenden. Ich hatte einen Bruder
Leon der 1923 geboren wurde und 6 Monate nach der Ge
burt starb.
ANDERE VERWANDTE: Ich weiss dass mein Vater im
Baltikum Verwandte hatte, aber unsere Familie hatte
keinen Kontakt mit ihnen und ich kannte niemanden
Ich hatte keine nahen Verwandten mütterlicherseits
und die entfernten Verwandten in dem Heimatdorf meiner
Mutter unterhielten keinen Kontakt mit meiner Familie
da sie die Ehe meiner Mutter mit einem "Ausländer" eines
anderen Glaubens ablehnten. Ich habe das Heimatdorf mei-
ner Mutter niemals besucht.
Ich hatte niemals nahe
NAHE FREUNDE UND BEKANNTE:
Freunde aber ich stand den folgenden Personen in
der Stadt etwas näher:
(1)
Direktor von RTS, der 1959 nach Rustavi in Geor-
gien SSR versetzt wurde.
(2) Rayon Tierarzt, der sein Büro in der tierärztli-
chen Klinik des Rayons hatte und der viel im
Rayon herumreiste um dort die Bauern zu besuchen.
(3) Bibliothekarin des Klubs ( eine Freundin)
BESONDERE BEFÄHIGUNGEN: Ich liebe es kleine Dinge zu
erfinden und mir im eigenen Heim eine gute Werkstatt
einzurichten.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_147.jpeg ---
14-00000
Abuse
14.
SPRACHEN:
-5-
Georgische Sprache
Russisch
Deutsch
Englisch
Muttersprache
von der Schule und durch
Kontakt mit der Bevölke
rund in russisch spre
chenden Gebieten und als
Soldat.
von der Schule und durch
Aufenthalt in Deutschland
Von der technischen Schule
und durch meinen Kontakt
mit Amerikanern in Deutsch
land
15.
16.
FINANZIELLE LAGE:
keine
-
-
AUSBILDUNG:
1927-1934 Trudowaja Schkola Nr. 107 (10- Jahre Schule,
desatiletka) die sich an der Ecke von Prospekt Michailow
skiy und Kirochnaja Ulitsa in Tbilisi befand. ( Zur Zeit
heissen die Strassen PLECHANOVA and MARDSHANISCHWILI).
Vor 1927 war es das deutsche Realgymnasium und obwohl es
in eine srednjaja schkola ungewandelt worden war wurde
der Unterricht bis 1930 in Deutsch abgehalten und erst
von diesem Jahr an in der georgischen Sprache. Die Mehr-
zahl der Schüler waren Georgier. Bis 1930 gab es zwei
Stunden in der Woche russischen Sprachunterricht und eine
Stunde georgischen Sprachunterricht. Ich war sieben Jahre
in dieser Schule aber wegen des Todes meiner Mutter wech-
selte ich auf die technische Schule über da ich dort woh-
nen konnte und verpflegt wurde.
1934-1938 Tbiliskii Elektro-Technicum in der Sowetskaja
Ulitsa in Tbilisi, ein zwei-stöckiges Gebude mit Garten
wo die Werkstätten und Wohnheime untergebracht waren. Im

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_150.jpeg ---
14-00000
Die Stadt hat gegenwärtig ungefähr 10.000 Einwohner und be-
findet sich an der Eisenbahnstrecke Samtredia-Suchumi ( die
Hauptstrecke zwischer. bilisi und Moskau mit Abzweigungen nach
Poti, dem Badeort am Schwarzen Meer. Die Stadt liegt zwischen
zwei Zuflüssen des Rion Flusses: Tsivi und Terachi. Am Letzteren
liegt ein paar Kilometer von M. ZCHAKAJA entfernt ein kleines
Elektrizitätswerk wo ich nach meiner Rückkehr aus dem II. Welt-
rieg zeitweilig arbeitete. Bei M.T.S. ( welche 1958 in R.T.S.
umbenannt wurde nachdem die Einrichtungen und Maschinen den
lokalen Getreide-und Trauben- erzeugenden Kolchosen zugeteilt
worden waren und als einzige Verantwortung die Reparatur ~ die-
ser Maschinen mit R.T.S. verblieb ) Ich wurde bald Vorarbeiter
einer Gruppe von Elektro-Mechanikern, die für die Pflege und
die Reparaturen der elektrischen Teile von landwirtschaftlichen
und anderen Maschinen verantwortlich waren. Mein Anfangsgehalt
war 400 oder 500 Rubel, aberes stieg schnell und als ich in die
Armee einberufen wurde war mein Gehalt schon fast doppelt so
hoch.
i
nach❤
Aus persönlichen Gründen kehrte ich in diese Stadt zurück,
dem ich aus dem Militärdienst entlassen worden war und ich er-
hielt meine alte Stellung wieder. Ich bekam dazu noch eine
Stelle als Elektro-Techniker mit dem vorher erwähnten Elektri-
zitätswerk, welches Elektrizität für die Stadt und dem übrigen
Rayon erzeugte. Ich erhielt diese Stelle zugewiesen, da nach
den Krieg ein Mangel an qualifizierten Arbeitskräften bestand.
Ich arbeitete in der zweiten Schicht im Elektrizitätswerk von
1947-1953 ( dann wurde die Stelle von einem jungen Absolventen
des Kutaisi Technikums gefüllt). Ich verdiente dort 700 Rubel
reben meinem Grundgehalt bei R.T.S. Vor meiner Flucht war mein
Einkommen ungefähr 120 neue Rubel Brutto. Ich hatte susätzliches
Einkommen von Wochenend-Arbeiten für die Reparatur von Haushalt
gegenständen,Radios usw. durch Einwohner der Stadt. Das Geld war
1961 10 zu 1 abgewertet waden.
1.
Parkast

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
!
C
2.
i
interview story C. . O. went on to say that we were wondering
if a copy of the story might have gone to the BFV in Bonn and
that Wilms had missed one of the old copies when he recalled
all copies recently and replaced them with the new story. John
said that Camp Zirndorf processes 50 to 100 cases a month, one
half of which are interest in one way or another to the BFV
an
He said that what had gone to Bonn was very likely rot,
that the entire story would not have been sent to Bonn. John
went on to say that with the new copy in the file, if this
excerpt should come to light in the future, a check would merely
indicate that someone had made a mistake and the matter would be
dropped. John added that he knows we are concerned about this
case,
but that he sees no reason why there should be any trouble
of any kind He said that the only problem will be if Subject
himself comes to the attention of the authorities because of
some shinanigans on his part.
W
Om K. D

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_148.jpeg ---
* MAIN NRE
14-00000
Sommer 1934 suchte ich um Aufnahme in dieser Schule an
und überreichte das Schulzeugnis der sieben absolvierten
Jahre und ein Photo. In Juli oder August bestand ich die
Aufnahmeprüfung über Mathematik, Physik und schriftliche
und mündliche Prüfungen in georgischer und russischer Spra-
che. Als mein Name auf der Aushängetafel der Schule auf
schien wusste ich, dass ich bestanden hatte. Ich musste
kein Schulgeld bezahlen und bekam ein Stipendium welches
gerade alles lebensnotwendige deckte. Der Aufenthalt im
Schulheim, wo ich ein Zimmer mit drei anderen Studenten
teilte,war frei. Im ersten Stock des Technikums in der
Nähe des Schulbüros, war ein Speisesaal wo man billig es-
sen konnte. Das Essen war schlecht. Die weiblichen Studen-
ten lebten in einem Nebengebäude in derselben Strasse, zwei
oder drei Häuserblocks vom Technikum
Vier Jahre studierte ich Physik, Mathematik, Geschichte,
Englisch, georgische Sprache und Literatur; von 1936 oder
1937 an die Verfassung der Sowjet Union. Die Gegenstände
wurden auf dem Stand einer"Höheren Schule" gelehrt. Dann
gab es noch die folgenden spezialen Unterrichtsgegenstän-
de: Technologie der Metalle, Theorie der Mechanik, Katerial-
stärke, Elektro-Maschinen, elektrische Arbeitsverfahren,
Elektro-Geräte, elektrische Messinstrumente, Zeichnen. Die
Studenten wurden auch militärisch ausgebildet und körper-
lich ertüchtigt. Der Unterricht dauerte von September bis
Juli. Die Sommerferien verbrachte ich gewöhnlich auf einem
Kolchos mit einer Gruppe, die vom Technikum organisiert wor-
den war, um den Bauern mit der Ernte zu helfen.
Die Prüfungen fanden zwei mal im Jahre statt, vor dem Jahres-
ende und am Ende eines zweiten Semesters. Noten wurden nach
dem folgenden Systen gegeben:
-

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_152.jpeg ---
14-00000
·10:
an Autos durchführte. Ich weiss die Nummer
Finhei
nicht mehr in der ich meine Grundausbildung erhielt.
diesem Zeitpurkt waren die Kasernen überfüllt, meistens
Solten der Infantrie und Artillerie die immer wieder
abgelöst wurden
E.
SPEZIALAUSBILDUNG:
RESERVE ZUGEHÖRIGKSIT
Sommer 1939:
Herbst 1946:
G.
Eiren Monat Fahrschule wie oben
erwähnt,
Aus Gesundheits- unden untauglich
für aktiven Diezst und der Reserve
zuge teilt.
Aus der Armee entlassen-nachdem
ich meine Reise und Entlassungs
papiere meinem-ajwo jenkomat über-
geben hatte erhielt ich ein neues
Soldbuch welches meine Reserve Zu-
gehörigkeit enthielt. Ich wurde nie
mehr einberufen oder zu irgendeiner
Übung eingezogen nachdem ich von
meinem Militärdienst entlassen
worden war.
CHRONOLOGISCHE AUFZEICHNUNG MEINES MILITLEDIENSTES:
Mit einer Gruppe anderer Rekruten wurde ich mit dem Zug zu
der 253. Separaten Luftabwehr Artillerie Division, 2. Batterie,
gebracht ( OSAD- ogne-saschtschitnyi artilleriski division ).
Der kormandierende Offizier der Batterie war Leutnant WAKS.
Kommandant der wswod uprawlenje (Verwaltung, Zugsführer)
der Division war Leutnant ENDELADSE. Stellvertretender Divi-
sionskormandant für politische Belange war Haupmann TSCHOCHA
und politruk meiner Batterie war Senior Leutnant SAMARIN.
Major Wlado ( Wladimir) GURGENIDSE war kommandierender Offizier
von OSAD und im Februar 1943 wurde er auch zum Commandeur von

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_149.jpeg ---
14-00000
komun
12-
OWLETT Burmares
:
Otlitschno (sehr gut)
Choroscho (gut)
Posredstwenno (genügend)
Plocho (schledt)
Otschen plocho (sehr schlect)
Die ersten drei Noten waren notwendig um versetzt zu werden.
Frühling 1938 hatte ich Abschlussprüfungen, mündlich und
schriftlich und ich bekam ein Diplom ausgehändigt. Das Zeug-
nis war eine Seite lang und brachte zum Ausdruck, dass ich
das Technikum 4 Jahre lang besucht hatte. Es enthielt die No-
ten für alle Gegenstände und zeigte, dass ich als electro-
mechanic ausgebildet worden war
Allen Prüflingen wurden verschiedene Arbeitsplätze zugewiesen
an denen sie mindestens zwei Jahre zu verbleiben hatten. Das
ist eine Art von Rückzahlung des Geldes, das die Regierung für
die Ausbildung ausgegeben hatte. Ich wurde MICHA-ZCHAKAJA
M.T.S. zugewiesen; der Name wurde 1958 in R.T.S. abgewandelt.
17. BERUFLICHER WERDEGANG:
1938-1941 und 1946-bis zur Flucht MICHA ZCHAKAJA MIT.S.
(Maschinen-Traktoren-Station), später abgewandelt in R.T.S.
(Reparatur-Technische-Station) ( Matchino-Traktornaja und bzw.
Remontno- Technitscheskaja Stanzija ). MICHA-ZCHAKAJA wurde von
der Bevölkerung einfach Zchakaja genannt und war Rayon-Zentrum
des Zchakajskii Rayon, so genannt nach dem berühmten georgischen
Revolutionär MICHA ZCHAKAJA (( der alte Name der Stadt war
ACHAL -SENAKI bezw. ACHAL SENAKSKII Rayon ). M. Zchakaja war
einer der Organisatoren der georgischen kommunistischen Partei,
->>

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_151.jpeg ---
14-00000
18.
MILITARISCHER WERDEGANG
"
REGISTRIERUNG FUR MILITÄRDIENST: Im Sommer 1939
wurde ich von meinem rayon-wojenkomat (Rekrutierungs-
stelle) benachrichtigt, dass ich mich an einem bestimm
ten Tag dort einzufinden habe; von dort ging es mit
einer Gruppe anderer zukünftiger Rekruten zu der rayon
polyclinic für die medizinische Untersuchung. Ich habe
den linken Daumen und Zeigefinger bis zum ersten Glied
durch einen Arbeitsunfall verloren und als dies den Re-
krutierungsstelle mitgeteilt wurde wurde ich für den
aktiven Dienst als ungeeignet erklärt und der Reserve
zugewiesen. Zu demselben Zeitpunkt wurde mein pripisnoje
swide telstwo (Registrierungs-Dokument ) für ein Sold-
buch ausgetauscht.
.
B. EINZIEHUNGSTAG: Ungefähr am 26 August 1941 wurde
ich aufgefordert mich am 27. August beim raywojenkomat
zu melden. Ich tat das und wurde aufgefordert mich Zum
Dienst am folgenden Tag zu melden. Mit einer Gruppe von
ungefähr 80 bis 100 Rekruten meines Rayons fuhren mir mit
dem Zug von Tbilisi nach Baku, wo die Gruppe in der so-
genannten Saljanskije Kasarmi ( S. Kaserne) untergebracht.
wurde, die sich am Stadtrand von Baku, auf der Strasse
Enach Saljani und zur iranischen Grenze, befand.
C.
militärische EINHEIT und ERKENNUNGSNUMMER: Ich diente
bei der Luftabwehr Artillerie. Eine Erkennungsnummer hat
es bei der sowjetischen Armee nicht gegeben.
D. GRUNDAUSBILDUNG: Meine erste militärische Ausbildung
erhielt ich in der Saljani Kaserne in Baku und sie dauerte
zwei Monate. Einen Monat reguläre Grundausbildung und im
zweiten Monat verbesserte ich meine Qualifikation als
Autofahrer ( Ich hatte gelernt wie man einen Wagen
während ich in der M.T.S. die elektrischen Reparaturen
fährt

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_153.jpeg ---
1-4-00000
+
11
PWO (proti o- osdischnaja oborona) (Luftschutz ) für die
Stadt Michurinsk ernannt. Das Hauptquartier der Division war
in Michurinsk, während die Batterie in der Kae der Station
TARASOWO bei der Siedlung Konskoje, 7 km von Kichurinsk und
6 km von den 6 errichteten Gehegen bei Kochetowa (Station)
lag. Ein hohes Hauptquartier war in Tambow, und wurde erst von
Oberst TSCHERNJAWSKI und später von Oberst ZERO, einem de-
gradierten General kommandiert.
Als ich zuerst in Michurinsk eintraf wurde ich erst als Last-
wagenfahrer den Verpflegungszug der Division z-geteilt (chos-
wswod oder chosjajstwennyi wswod), kommandiert von Junior
Leutnant MAKAROW. Später wurde ich mit dem oben erwähnten
ENDELADSE bekannt, ein Landsmann von mir und wurde durch sei-
nen Einfluss den Divisions-Kommandeur GURGENIDSE, auch ein
Georgier der später zum Oberstleutnant befördert wurde, als
persönlicher Fahrer zugeteilt. Er behielt mich in dieser Po-
sition bis ich vom Militärdienst entlassen wurde.
H.
BEFÖRDERUNGER UND DEGRADIERUNGEN: Nach 6 Monaten. Mili-
tärzeit wurde ich zum jefrejtor ( Gefreiten) befördert, am
Ende des ersten Jahres zum Unterfeldwebel und 1944 wurde ich
zum Feldwebel befördert
IT
AUSZEICHNUNGEN:
keine
J. ENTLASSUNGSTAG: Ich wurde vom aktiven Militärdienst
Ende September 1946 entlassen. Ich erhielt meinen Fahrbefehl
und. Reisegeld von meiner Einheit in Michurinsk, die ich spä-
ter dem rajwojenkomat übergab. 1955 wurde ich nochmals ärzt-
lich untersucht, auf Befehl vom vojenkomat und offiziell aus
meiner Reservestellung entlassen, aus Gesundheitsrunden (so
wie zuvor) und erhielt eine sogenannte belji bilet ( weisse

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_155.jpeg ---
14-00000
-13-
in den Krieg ging. Während des Krieges
hörte ich, dass Nina's Mann im Krieg ge
fallen war und ich entschloss mich nach
Zchakaja zurückzukehren um in ihrer Nähe
zu sein. Ich zog zu Nina und lebte mit ihr
zusammen ohne unsere Heirat bei SAGS (Re
gistrierstelle von Geburten, Heiraten und
Sterbefälle) zu registrieren. Obwohl ich
erst darauf bestand unsere Verbindung zu
legalisieren wollte Nina es nicht, da sie in
ihrer ersten Ehe unglücklich war; sie wollte
frei sein um die Verbindung jeder Zeit lösen
zu können.
Während der letzten Jahre fand ich heraus,
dass Nina sich während meiner Abwesenheit
von zu Hause mit anderen Männern traf. Un-
stimmigkeiten entstanden, die mehr und mehr
wuchsen als die Zeit verging. Nachdem das
Verhältnis mit Nina sehr kühl geworden war
fing ich an mich mit anderen Frauen zu tref.
fen. Wir waren oft daran uns endgültig zu
trennen, aber wir fanden immer wieder zu-
sammen. Ich versuchte verzweifelt unser
Problem zu lösen, denn ich hatte zu einem
Zeitpunkt als wir uns noch sehr nahe waren
Bemerkungen gegen die Regierung gemacht und
ich plante sogar eine gemeinsame Flucht aus
den USSR. Ich wollte sie nicht zusehr ver-
ärgern um sie nicht womöglich dazu zu brin-
gen, dass sie mich bei der Militia anzeigte.
Aber aus irgendwelchen Gründen wollte Nina
nicht gänzlich mit mir brechen und eines
=

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_154.jpeg ---
14-00000
-12-
Karte)oder dauernde Befreiung vom Militärdienst.
19
WOHNORTE SEIT GEBURT:
1919-1926
1926-1934
1934-1938
1938-1941
1941-1946
1946-1962
(bis zur Flucht)
verschiedene Adressen in Tbilisi
Tbilisi, Kirotschnaja Ulitsa Nr. 35
eine Wohnung in einem 2-stöckigen
Haus, welches früher privates Bigen-
tum war und später SHAKT (Staatliche
Häuserverwaltung) unterstand.Nach dem
Tode meiner Mutter trat ich in das
Elektro-Technikum ein, wo ich im Pensionat
war.
Tbilisi, Ulitsa Sowjetskaja ( Nummer:
nicht in Erinnerung), Studentenheim des
Tbilisi Elektro-Technikums.
MICHA ZCHAKAJA, Ulitsa Tsulukidse Nr.14.
Hier mietete ich ein Zimmer in einem
privaten einstöckigen Haus, das einem
pensionierten Eisenbahn-Beichensteller,
Ilja LORDKIPANIDSE, gehörte, welcher
ein Zimmer vermieten musste, um etwas
zu seiner Fension dazuzuverdienen. Ilja's
Frau Keto Katherina ) kümmerte sich um
meine Wäsche und kochte für mich wofür
ich extra etwas bezahlte. Das Ehepaar.
hatte keine Kinder und behandelten mich
wie ihren eigenen Sohn.
Militärzeit
Micha Zchakaja, Ulitsa Schota Rustaveli
Nr. 25, die Privatwohnung meiner Gelieb
ten. Nina GANDELI. Ich liebte sie und
hatte mit ihr ein Verhältnis bevor ich

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_157.jpeg ---
.14-00000-
23°
-15-
Elektro-Technikum war. Dabei
urde von zwei Klassenkameraden
die Bürgschaft übernommen, jeder von den beider war schon
mehr als zwei Jahre Mitglied Ich reichte mein Gesuch bei
der lokalen Komsomol jatschejka (Zelle) ein und bei einer
Zusammenkunft der Zellenmitglieder wurde mein Aufnahmege-
such besprochen, ich erzählte meine Lebensgeschichte und
beantwortete Fragen. Nachdem ich aufgenommen worden war
erhielt ich meine Mitgliedskarte in ungefähr zwei Monaten
vom Stadt-Rayon-Komittee des Tbilisi Komsomol; darauf hin
besuchte ich Versammlungen und zahlte kleine Beiträge. Ich
hatte niemals eine offizielle Position bei Komsomol. Als ich
Tbilisi verliess musste ich mich von der Tbilisi Organisation
streichen lassen und mich am neuen Wohnort Micha Zchakaja
( bei der Bevölkerung gewöhnlich nur "Zchakaja" genannt),
neu eintragen lassen. Dasselbe geschah als ich in die Armee
eintrat ( Ausstreichen aus der alten Organisation und Ein-
schreiben am neuen Wohnort). Als ich nach der Entlassung von
der Armee wieder nach Zchakaja zurückkehrte liess ich mich
nicht wieder in die lokale Organisation eintragen.
:.
Als ich in Zchakaja zu arbeiten begann wurde ich automatisch
in die (prof.-org ) Gewerkschaft eingeschrieben, in der ich
ein passives Mitglied war, das seine Beiträge (etwas wie
1½ meines Gehaltes ) an den Organisator der Gewerkschaft
von MTS bezahlte und von Zeit zu Zeit einer Pflichtversamm-
lung beiwohnte. Ich machte nie Gebrauch von den Vorteilen
der Mitgliedschaft wie ermässigte Preise in Erholungsstätten
( putewka v dom otdicha ) .
VERBINDUNGEN MIT EINEM SICHERHEITSDIENST:
Ich hatte nie einen Kontakt mit einer Sicherheitsbehörde.
Ich wurde auch nie aufgefordert in irgendeiner Art für den
sowjetischen Sicherheitsdienst zu arbeiten.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_156.jpeg ---
14-00000..
20.
21
22.
REISEN:
14
Tages teilte sie mir mit, dass sie ein Kind
erwarte und dass sie unsere Heirat legalisieren
möchte. Da ich mich aber nicht als
der Vater
des Kindes betrachtete und da ich Erpressung von
Ninas Seite fürchte te entschloss ich mich meine
Flucht, die ich ohnehin schon geplant hatte, zu
beschleunigen.
Keine anderen als schon erwähnt
VERHAFTUNGEN:
Im Juni 1962 kam diemilitia zu mir und bracht mich von meinem
Arbeitsplatz zu ihrer Dienststelle wo ich beschuldigt wurde
ein langjähriges Mitglied einer georgischen Widerstandsgruppe
zu sein und regierungsfeindliche Ausserungen gemacht zu haben.
Obwohl ich solche Bemerkungen bei verschiedenen Gelegenheiten
gemacht hatte und deshalb schuldig im Sinne des letzteren Teils
der Anschuldigung war, konnte ich fühlen, dass die Militia nicht
genügend Informationen besass und ich verneinte alle Anschuldi-
gungen. Ich konnte mir nicht denken wer dahinter steckte. Nach
langen Verhören, bei denen ich über alle Einzelheiten meines
Lebens, Eltern, Militärdienst, Kontakte, u.s.w. befragt wurde,
wurde ich mit einer Warnung entlassen das Gebiet nicht zu
verlassen und es wurde mir gesagt ich würde wieder von der
Militia hören. Mit dieser einzigen Ausnahme bin ich nie ver-
*haftet oder verhört worden, weder bei der Militia oder anderen
Sicherheitsbehörden.
MITGIEDSCHAFT IN POLITISCHEN PARTEIEN ODER ORGANISATIONEN:
Ich gehörte niemals der kommunistischen Partei an. Mir wurde
nahe gelegt 1937 Komsomol beizutreten während ich am Tbilisi
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_158.jpeg ---
14-00000
, 2
24
-16-
FLUCHT
GRUNDE:
Trotzdem ich in einem kommunistischen Land geboren
und erzogen worden war begann ich doch schon früh
zeitig zu verstehen, dass für die Einzelperson keine
Freiheit bestand. Es war mir auch klar, dass persön
licher Aufstieg nicht von dem Talent und der Recht-
schaffenheit eines Menschen abhing, sondern von dem
Ausmass der politischen Betätigung. Ich sah durch die
kommunistischen Lügen, da die Wirklichkeit so verschie
den von der offiziellen Propaganda war. Während und
nach dem Krieg traf ich Menschen die westliche Länder
besucht hatten und ich war in der Lage Bruchstücke
der Wahrheit über den Unterschied in den Lebensarten
aus diesen Erzählungen abzuleiten, obwohl diese Be-
richte sehr vorsichtig vorgebracht wurden. Nachdem ich
1956 ein gutes Radio der"Mir" Marke kaufte hörte ich
sehr oft ausländischen Stationen zu. Lange Zeit trug
ich mich mit der Idee aus den USSR zu fliehen wo ich
keine Familie, keine Verwandten und keine Aufstiegsmög-
lichkeiten hatte. Meine feindliche Einstellung zur Re-
gierung wurde stärker und stärker mit der Zeit und es
wurde für mich immer schwieriger mich zu kontrollieren
und diesen Gefühlen nicht offen Ausdruck zu verleihen,
was ich dann doch einige Male tat. Meine Erfahrung mit
der Militia und die Entwicklung meines persönlichen Le-
bens beschleunigte meine Fluchtpläne.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_16.jpeg ---
:
W
14-00000
S-S-C-RE
REKORT
CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFEC
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DANE:
17 February 1964
TIME:
1345 hours
PLACE:
51 Kuhwaldstr.
ORME K DARONNAT
Case C,
COMMENTS:
CO met Subject in what is now his apartment and
0.
which has been completely painted and wallpapered
gave Subject a copy of his Lebenslauf in German and a copy
in English He was told to read the story thoroughly and
then to call C. O. later in the week when he was ready to
discuss any points in the story not clear to him or to
resolve any questions which he might have. C. O. said he
would bring a Soviet realities expert with him who could
answer any questions he might have. Subject gave C. O. his
copy of the old political recognition interview story plus
receipts which indicated he had paid 300 DM "Caution" and a
He also
rent receipt for 300 DM for the month of February.
showed C. O. his rental contract for the 6 month period
starting February 1, 1964. Subject gave C. O. a bill for
C. O. gave Subject the
410 DM, cost of repairing his lower plate.
money and told him to pay the bill and get the receipt
Subject was told that
stamped paid and return it to C. 0.
C. O. would pay him for the month of March, deregister him
probably the latter part of the week, and give him the
deregistration slip. He was also told C. O. would deliver.
his new political recognition interview story to him
probably this week. Subject was not too pleased to hear that
he would be deregistered because his Reiseausweis expires in
October 1964 and Subject feels that it might not be renewed
unless he is under the protection of the U.S. Army. C. O.
said he feels there is no reason to worry unless Subject is
not working and, thereby proving that he is not an industrious
law-abiding citizen. Subject said that he has been trying to
sell his inventions and told C. O. the following story:
.
-
"
"
.
Subject, in his wanderings about the city, had-by
accident met the Frankfurt representative of a Munich firm
which manufactures à device called the "Starlettograph which
is used in the printing industry. Subject told the sales
representative how his product could be improved and, as a
SECRET
Extra
C:
!
1
--

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_159.jpeg ---
14-00000
B
17
TECHNISCHE EINZELHEITEN DER FLUCHT:
"
Am 25. Juni 1962, drei Tage nach meinen Erfahrungen
mit der Militia, verliess ich meine Wohnung um 7 Uhr
früh wie jeden Tag um in die Arbeit zu gehen. Ich
verliess die Stadt zu Fuss in Richtung Samtredia.
Ich trug meine normale Kleidung, hatte 80 Rubel bei
mir und eine Handssche. Ich wagte nicht den Zug zu.
nehmen da ich Angst hatte von der Militia überwacht
zu werden.Nachdem ich 2-3 km auf der Landstrasse ge
gangen war wurde ich von einem Lastwagen eines nahe
gelegenen Kolchos mitgenommen, der in der gleichen Rich-
tung fuhr Ich verliess den Lastwagen in der Stadtmitte
von Samtredia, zahlte dem Fahrer einen Rubel und ging
zur Eisenbahnstation; hier kaufte ich eine Fahrkarte
nach Batumi und nahm den Zug um 11.50der um 14.15 in
Batumi ankam. Ich fand einen sicheren Platz und schlief
bis zur Dunkelheit. Ich verliess Batumi zu Fuss entlang
des Seeufers bis ich 1 1/2 oder 2 km südlich die alte
Schiess-Stätte erreichte. Hier ging ich um ungefähr
22 Unr ins Wasser, nachdem ich meinen Pass zerstört
hatte ( die anderen Dokumente liess ich au Hause )
und vergrub meine Kleider und Tasche. Ich wusste durch
das Studium einer Landkarte, dass ich ungefähr 18 km
zu schwimmen hatte um türkisches Gebiet zu erreichen.
Ich schwamm die ganze Nacht und ich war nicht sicher
ob ich schon türkisches Gebiet erreicht hatte aber
ich war erschöpft und schwamm ungefähr um 3 Uhr oder
4 Uhr früh zum Ufer. An dem Punkt wo ich ankam began
das Ufer steil anzusteigen. Ich sah die Silhuette einer
Hütte und ging hinein. Da fand ich einen alten elektri-
schen Motor, Bussisch beschriftet, woraus ich ersah, dass
ich noch in Russland war. Ich versteckte mich in der Nähe
'
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_161.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
19-
25-
rief in russischer Sprache. Ich hörte Stimmen und Fuss-
tritte im Haus, aber niemand öffnete. Ich kletter auf
das Dach eines Stalles in Hof und verbrachte dort die
Nacht. Prüh am nächsten Morgen wurde ich durch Geräusche
im Hof geweckt. Ich sah einige Frauen und zwei Männer.
Ich näherte mich ihnen und versuchte mich durch Zeichen-
sprache zu verständigen und zu erklären, dass ich aus
Russland kam. In der Zwischenzeit waren Menschen mit
Stöcken und Axter auf den Hof gekommen. Ich versuchte
wieder zu erklären, dass ich aus Russland käme und in
der Türkei verbleiben möchte. Die Männer nahmen mich dann
zu den militärischen Behörden in Kemal Pascha.
Als ich in Batumi ins Wasser ging, hatte ich Schwimmhosen
an, einen Gürtel und ein paar Schwimmflossen. Ich hatte
ein Klappmesser im Gürtel, einen Sack Nadeln um mich zu
stechen im Falle eines Krampfes, mein Geld war in einem
Nylonsack, 3 Tafel Schockolade, ein Kompass und zwei
Phenamin Tabletten um meine Energie zu heben, irpinem
anderen Nylonsack. Mit Ausnahme des Suchlichtes auf dem
Wasser, das ich durch Tauchen zu umgehen suchte, gab es
keine anderen Hindernisse.
:
Ich hatte niemanden von meinen Fluchtplänen erzählt und
niemand hat mir dabei geholfen..
Von Kemal-Pascha, wo ich Kleider bekan, wurde ich mit dem
Wagen nach Erserum gebracht und von dort mit dem Zug nach
Istanbul ins Flüchtlingslager. Dort war ich eine Woche
und wurde dann mit Hilfe von US Behörden am Freitag den
6. Juli 1962 nach Deutschland gebracht.
DOKUMENTE:
A. PASS:
Ich erhielt meinen ersten drei Jahre gültigen Pass von der
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_160.jpeg ---
14-00000.
2
!
-18-
im Gebüsch und verbrachte dort die Nacht und den fol
genden Tag. Als es dunkel wurde, kletterte ich den Ab-
hang hinauf um das Gelände zu überblicken. Ich ging
ein Stück und hörte russische Stimmen die vom Ufer kamen.
Ich sah einen dunklen Gegenstand auf dem Wasser,welcher
wie ein Unterseebot aussah. Ich ging weiter am Ufer
entlang und um ungefähr 22 oder 23 Uhr ging ich ins
Wasser und schwamm 3 km hinaus und dann parallel zum
Ufer Als ich in die Reichweite eines Suchlichtes kam,
das über dem Wasser spielte, tauchte ich unter. Als
ich nach oben kam ging das Suchlicht gerade über mich
hinweg, aber nichts geschah und ich wusste, dass ich
unendeckt geblieben war. Ich schwamm bis zur Erschöpfung,
einige Stunden vor der Morgendämmerung schwamm ich zum
Ufer und versteckte mich in einer Höhle zwischen zwei
Felsen im Meer in Ufernähe. Da verblieb ich zum Morgen.
Am nächsten Morgen kletterte ich den Abhang hinauf, wo
ich ein steinernes Gebilde sah, das wie ein Grab aus-
sah. Ich ging hinein und schaute mir die Umgebung durch
eine kleine Öffnung an. Ich sah ein kleines Dorf, später
lernte ich, dass es Kemal-Pascha war. Erst dachte ich
ein Minarett wäre ein Beobachtungsturm. Ich nahm an,
es wäre das Dorf Sarpi noch immer auf russischem Boden.
Ich war sehr durstig und kletterte den Hügel hinunter
zu einem Bach um zu trinken. Ich traf einen 11 oder
12 jährigen Buben den ich russisch ansprach, aber der
Bub lief weg. Ich war noch immer nicht sicher wo ich
war, ich ging ein Stück im Bach um meine Fussabdrücke
zu verbergen. Dann versteckte ich mich im Gebüsch bis
zur Dunkelheit. Ich ging dann um das Dorf herum zum
anderen Ende. Ich betrat das Dorf und klopfte an die
Tür eines Hauses, das am Abhang eines Hügels lag. Ich

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_162.jpeg ---
+4-00000
-20
B.
Militia Dinststelle Nr. 17 (Pass Abteilung) des Molotowski
Rayon von Tbilisi, wo ich damals wohnte. Der Pass war ein
einzelnes Blatt Papier und meinem Photo und den wichtigsten
Daten. 1939 tauschte ich ihn gegen einen 5-Jahres Pass ein,
bei der Militia des Micha Zchakaja Rayons ausgestellt. Das
war ein Pass in der üblichen Buchform mit Photo und wich
tigsten Daten und hatte einen propiska Stempel (Registra-
tion mit der Militia), welcher den Tag meiner Ankunft in
dieser Stadt und meine Adresse enthielt. Als ich in die
Armee eingezogen wurde, gab ich den Pass und das Militär-
buch bei den rayonvojenkomat ab und bekam ihn nach meiner
Entlassung wieder ausgehändigt. Darauf hin erhielt ich ei-
nen neuen 5-Jahres Pass von der gleichen Dienststelle mit
propiska, welcher meine neue Adresse anzeigte. 1951 tauschte
ich diesen Pass gegen einen neuen 10-Jahres Pass ein und
1961 gegen wiederum einen neuen 10 Jahre gültigen Pass.
MILITÄRBUCH: ( Wojennii Bilet )
Siehe Para. 18. Inder Armee hatte ich ein Soldbuch
:( slushebnaja knishka ), welches ich meinem rayonwojenkomat
nach meiner Entlassung aus der Armee übergab.
C. ARBEITSBUCH: ( Trudowaja Knishka )
Ich besass keines, da es von dem Arbeitsgeber ausgestellt
wird und wenn jemand seinen Arbeitsplatz ändert, dem neuen
Arbeitsgeber übergeben wird. Ich aber habe niemals meinen
Arbeitsplatz verändert.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_163.jpeg ---
14-00000
TERMINATION AGREEMENT
The undersigned hereby acknowledges that a contractual relationship
Gas moretofore existed between him and the
voen him and the Government of the United States
(bereinafter referred to as ("the Government"). The Government:
has fully and completely sat
satisfied all of its obligations to the undersigned.
The undersigned
gned on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors, administra-
tors and ass gu hereby releases and forever discharges the Government, its
officers, agents and
and employees from any and all debts, elains, benefits or
demands arising out
out of the above mentioned contractual relationship.
indersigned fully understands and appreciates the fact that the prior
relationship atween the parties and all information and knowledge acqui
the course of said relationship (particularly with reference to persons and
ethods. ployed
red by the Government) are the property of said Government and
constitute allitary secrets affecting its security. The undersigned knows and
understands that these are protected by German Law under the provisions of
Annex À to the Convention on Rights and Obligations of Foreign Forces in the
Federal Republic of Germany
of preserve
The Government is highly appreciative of the excellent services heret
fore rendered by the undersigned. However to preserve the security above
mentioned, it is further understood and agreed that both parties shall here-
after disavow that the relationship ever existed.
The undersigned further agrees he possesses no right, title or interest
in any information or knowledge arising out of said relationship and he fur-
ther solemnly swears that he will never divulge, publish or reveal by word,
conduct or any other means the fact of said relationship nor any such knowledge
or information arising therefrom except as authorised in writing by the same
official of the Government as that who witnesses this oath.
:
WITNESS:
Frankfect/maines this and day of March 1764
Georg F Sanders
(L.S.)
William
Marinann

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_164.jpeg ---
14-00000
An das
Chilenische Generalkonsulat
Frankfurt am Main
Hendelsweg 64
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962
Sehr geehrter Herr Generalkonsul:
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprogramms fuer Fluechtlinge
haben wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach
Chile interessiert sind. Ich waere Ihnen daher sehr su
Dank verpflichtet, wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so
eingehend als moeglich informieren wuerden:
1.) Vorgang zur Bewerbung eines Finreisevisums unter ei-
fuegung von Mustern saemtlicher erforderlicher Frage-
bogen.
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in
Chile ansaessig sein muss, un die chilenische Staats-
buergerschaft zu erwerben.
3.) Hat Ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht
auf die Einwanderungsquote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Kuss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestimmte Mindestsumme
an Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Tinwanderungsvisum
ausgestellt werden kann?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand
des Eimranderers.
Fuer ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Frteilung der
erbetenen Auskunfte danke ich ihnen im voraus.
Mit vorzueglicher Hochachtung
A. O. Elmendorf
Executive Director

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_166.jpeg ---
14-0000
CHILE
Translation from German
Immigration Vica,
a) According to Chilean D.F.L. (Law Nr. 69) an immigration visa will be
issued to persons willing to emigrate to Chile together with their
families in order to undertake a selfsupporting work of technical
nature or an other special field. The visum gives the right of
unlimited residence and execution of profession in Chile.
nlimited residence and exec
In case of the issue of an immigration visa the work factor is
considered above the Eapital factor.
c) The belongings of the imigrant are, besides a low fee, free of
duty, tax, and storage fees.
d) in order to file an application for ar. immigration visa the special
conditions, cutlined in Circular Nr. 3 have to be fulfilled. Especially
the "Cartilla de imigracion" has to be furnished (forms are to be
obtained at the Consulate). The "Cartilla de Inmigracion" is to be
filed in duplicate and executed in Spanish.
e) Visa fees amount to DM 9.10 per passport.
List of luggage for an immigration visa
1) In case the application for an immigration visa is filed in Germany,
the luggage list must be furniched with seven copies. For proper
form see Circular Nr. 8.
2.) The luggage list can contain only personal belongings and material
necessary for the applicant's profession, which were owned by the
applicant before the immigration visa was issued and were produced
in the applicant's homecountry. The items must be used. In some
exclusive cases they may be new, however purchased before the issue.
of the visa.
3.) Items necessary for the execution of profession are such which serve
the aplicant in continuing the profession he has been executing while
still in Germany.
4.) Household belongings can be imported, however only to an extent in
accordance with the immigrant's situation.
5.) In exclusive cases the immigrant may also import a motor vehicle,
truck, Jeep, or smaller truck. Trucks and jeeps can be imported
duty-free, for a delivery van 100% of the FOB-value are charged.
Passenger cara or other vehicles carnot be imported. The immigrant
can, however, import a tractor, should this be an item necessary
to carry out his profession.
6.) The luggage must not contain items of art or luxury, such as
valuable carpets, gobelins, music boxes etc.
--

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_168.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONSULADO GENERAL DE CHILE
FRANKFURT AM
WENDEL SWEG™
687346
EW/8
N8 951
An
American Friends of Russian Freedom
Incorporated.
Frankfurt/Main
P.O. box N8 5005
Eir
4-9-1962
5. SEP 1962
Erledigt
:
Betr.: Auswanderung nach Chile
Sehr geehrte Herren!
In Beantwortung Ihrer Fragen vom 31. August kön-
nen wir Ihnen folgende Auskunft geben:
1.- Einzelheiten cer die Erteilung eines Einreise-
bzw. inwanderungsvisums bitten wir, unserem
Circular 2 zu entnehmen.
2. Die chilenische Staatsbürgerschaft erwirbt man,
wenn man mindestens 5 Jahre ansässig war.
3.- Eine Einwanderungsquote besteht nicht.
4.- Gefragt sind vorwiegend technische Berufe.
5.- Es wäre besser, wenn der Einwanderer von irgend-
einer Seite her mit finanzieller Unterstützung
rechnen könnte.
6.- Siehe Circular 3.
Wir hoffen, Ihnen mit unserer Auskunft gediente zu
haben und stehen weiterhin gern zu Ihrer Verfügung.
SULADO
Hit vorzüglicher Hochachtung
GENERAL
OF
FRANCFORT
ü
Enrique Melkonien C..
Konsul

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_165.jpeg ---
14-00000
VASCONA A
ALL
LE
ranslation r Gexan
Letter from Consulado General de Chile
Question 1 see attachment
Question 23 Chilean citizenship can be obtained aster a minimum of five
years of residence in Chile
Question 3 There is no immigration quota
lit
Question Technical professions are in demand in the first place.
Question 5: It would be better the immigrant old count upon
some financial assistance:
Question 6 See Attachment

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_17.jpeg ---
!
14-00000
·2.
result of their discussions, WIROGUE met the director of
the firm The director became interested in an advertising
device which Subject has developed and asked him to prepare
a good working model in time for the Hanover Fair in April
The director also asked Subject, if the company supplied him
with one of their devices, would he be able to incorporate
his ideas for improving the machine in time for the Hanover
Fair Subject claims that he told the director he would
modify the machine by the end of March and if the device
works properly he would expect payment of 20,000 DM.
According to Subject, before the director returned to Munich
he promised to send a device to Frankfurt immediately upon
arrival. The name and address of the firm is:
7..
Film-Klischee GMBH
München 22
Thierschstrasse 15
SECAST

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_169.jpeg ---
14-00000
CIRCULAR
CONSULADO, CETERA DE CHILE
FARREURT LAIN
DELSWEG 64
EL. 68-73 46
Sehr geehrte
Frankfurt, den
4/9
10.62
Her American friends of
M. Russian Freedom
Detrifft Ihr Schreiben vom 31/8... 1942
RICHTLINIEN FÜR DIE ERTEILUNG EINES VISUMS UND DIE EIREISE VON TOURISTEN
Wir erlauben uns, Ihnen nachstehend einige rundsätzliche Erklärungen über die
Erteilung von Visa und die Einreise von Touristen in Chile zu geben. Ausländer
können in Chile unter verschiede
Voraussetzungen einreisens
1) als Tourist
2) mit einem Arbeitsvertragsvisum (VISACICI DE RESIDENTE SU. ETO A CONTRATO)
VISACION DE RESIDENTE ESTUDIANTE
als Studierender
4) zu einem längeren befristeten Aufenthalt (VISACION DE RESIDENTE TELPORARIO)
5) als Einwanderer
(VISACION DE INMIGRACION)
1. TOURISTEN
a) Auf Grund eines besonderen Abkommens zwischen Deutschland und Chile und
eines besonderen chilenischen Gesetzes kann man in Chile zu einem Aufent-
halt von höchstens Co Tagen als Tourist ohne Visum einreisen. (In besonde-
ren Fällen besteht die Löglichkeit, die Aufenthaltsdauer ein einziges Lal
um weitere 90 Tage in Chile verlängern zu lassen).
(b) Als Tourist kann man in Chile mit folgenden Unterlagen einreisen
Cultiger Pass ohne
wohne Visum, oder gültiger Personalausweis, aus dem der voll-
ständige Name, Geburtsort und -datum, Staatsangehörigkeit, Beruf, Wohn-
Fort, Ausstellungsdatum und Gültigkeitsdauer hervor ehen, und der Stempel
und Unterschrift der ausstellenden Behörde sowie ein Lichtbild des Inha-
bers enthält.
c) Außerdem ist ein von einem Amtserzt ausgestellter Internationaler Pocken-
impfschein mitzuführen, der 2 Jahre Gültigkeit hat.
d) Bei der Einreise ist die Rückpassare in das Herkunftsland oder die Passage
für ein anderes Land vorzulegen, fur das der Tourist eine Genehmigung zur
Einreise besitzt.
e) Bei der Einreise in Chile erhält der Tourist eine "Tarjeta de Turismo"
(Touristenkarte), die in zweifacher Ausfertigung auszufüllen ist.
f) Ver in Chile als Tourist einreist, kann dort keine beschite Tätigkeit sus-
üben. In Ausnahmefällen kann das Innenministerium in Chile eine Cenelmi-
gung für die Aushing einer solchen Tätigkeit für eine Höchstdauer von
5 Tagen erteilen.
g) Personen, die als Touristen in Chile einreisen, können dort keine "VISA-
CION DE RESIDENTE TEMPORARIO beantragen (siehe .rt.IV)
h) Als Touristen werden Personen angesehen, die als Erholungsreisende, we-
gen sportlicher Interessen, in Ausübung einer gesc ftlichen Tätigkeit
ohne Entgelt, aus familiaren Interessen, etc. me Chile kommen, ohne die
Absicht zu haben, für immer in lend zu bleiben oder dort zu arbeiten..
-1.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_170.jpeg ---
14-00000
1) Für eine Touristerreise brauchen keine konsularischen Formalitäten er
füllt zu werden.
Inhaber eines "Startenlosen-Passes" kornen in Chile inter den leichen
Bedingungen als Touristen ei-reisen, wenn aferde- folgende Vorausse
gen erfüllt werden:
1) ær Reisepass muß von einer Behörde seines Aufenthaltslandes oder von
einer von Chile anerkannten internationaler Stelle aus estellt sein
und alle für die Rückreise erforderlichen Transitvisa oder ein
Fansitvisa oder ein inrei
sevisum in ein anderes Land enthalten.
2) Der Passinhaber if in besitz einer GenehmigNS zur Wiedereinreise
in sein gegenwärtiges Aufenthaltsland sein.
II VISACION DE RESIDENTS SUJETO A CONTRATO (inreise auf rund eines Arteitsver
tragsvisums)
a) Jieses Visum wird Personen erteilt, die zur erfüllung eines rbeitsver-
trages nach Chile fahren.
b) Es wird für eine Dauer von höchstens zwei Jahren erteilt. Das Ende des Ver
tre es bedeutet jedoch stets das Ende der Gültigkeitsdauer des Visums
c) Zur Beantragung des Visuns ist der Arbeitsvertrag vorzulegen, auf dem min-
destens die Unterschrift des Arbeitgebers notariell beglaubigt sein auf
Der Vertrag muß eine lausel enthalten, daß der Arbeitgeber sich in je-
dem Fall verpflichtet, die kosten für die Rückreise des Arbeitnehmers zu
übernehmen. Das konsulat behält sich das Recht vor, eventuell eine Garan-
tie für die Bezahlung dieser Kosten zu verlangen. Auferden werden die in
unserem Circular Nr.3 bezeichneten Unterlagen benötigt.
•
d) Bei Vertragsende kann von den chilerischen Behörden ein neues Visum oder
die "Permanencia Definitiva" (Daueraufenthaltsgenehmigung) erteilt werden.
e) Die Visumgebühren betragen DE: 36,20 pro Pass.
III.VISACION DE RESIDENTE ESTUDIANTE (Visur für Studienzwecke)
a) Dieses Visum wird Ausländern erteilt, die nach Chile fahren wollen, um
dort an staatlichen oder staatlich anerkannten privaten Lehranstal ten
oder a
an Hoch- und Fachschulen zu studieren. Der Inhaber dieses Visums
kann damit solange in Chile bleiben, wie er Studierender ist.
b) Es ist ihm nicht gestattet, ohne besondere vorherige Genehmigung des chi-
lenischen Innenministeriums eine bezahlte Tätigkeit in Lend auszuüben.
c) Unter besonderen Umständen kann der Inhaber dieses Visums evtl. mit einem
Dauervisum in Chile bleiben. Nach einem zweijährigen Aufenthalt in Chile
hat er das Recht die "Permanencia Definitiva" zu beantragen (Daueraufent-
haltsgenehmigung).
d) Die Visumgebühren betragen D½ 36,20 pro Pass.
IV. VISACIONES DE RESIDENTE TEMPORARIO (Visum für befristeten Aufenthalt;
a) Dieses Visum wird Ausländern erteilt, die sich länger als Go Tage in Chi-
le aufhalten wollen und zu einen Verwandtenbesuch oder wegen anderer in-
teressen nach Chile kommen, oder wenn die chilenischen Behörden der Auf-
fassung sind, daß der Aufenthalt in Chile von besonderem Hitzen für das
Land ist. Das Visum berechtigt zu einem Aufenthalt von einem Jahr. skann
innerhalb seiner Gültigkeitsdauer, jedoch nicht nachher verlängert werden.
Nach Ablauf eines Jahres muß der Inhaber des Visums, wenn er in Chile
bleiben will, die "Permanencia Definitiva" (Daueraufenthaltsgenehmigung)
beantragen. Auch wer dieses Visum in Chile erhalten hat, buß die "Perma-
nencia Definitiva" ein Jahr nach der Visumerteilung bezw. nach zwei Jah-
ren seines dortigen Aufenthaltes beantragen.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_173.jpeg ---
14-000UU
__
FIwak
Betr. Einwanderungs visum
CIRCULAR
Vo
American Friends of
Russian Freedom
CONSULADO GENERAL DE CHILE
ankfurt/Main
endelsweg 64
el: 68 73 46
->
-
->
Unterlager für die Erteilung eines Visums
1) Reisepass. Die Cultigkeitsdauer darf frühestens 12 Monate nach der
Visumerteilung ablaufen.
2) Felizeiliches Führungszeugnis der zuständigen Polizeicehörde
(nicht mehr als 3 rate alt).
3) Allgemeine
4) Arztliches Attest des Auswanderun slagers (Hanau, München oder
Berlin) - wird nur für Einwerderungsvisun tenötigt.
H
5) Internationaler Fockenimpfschein, von Anisarzt ausgestellt.
(Nicht mehr als 2 Jahre und nicht weniger als 14 Tage alt).
6) Arbeitsvertres mi notariell register erschrift minde-
sters des Arbeitgebers und einer Klusel ruch welcher dieser
sick verpflichtet, Nic Rückreisekoster des Arbeitnehmers zu
tragen.
- 7) 4 Fassbilder (kein Fotomaton) 5 x 5 cm, auch für jedes Kind.
2) Jebühren Dil 3K, 20 prá Parai.
- 9) Gebühren DM. 9,10 pro Pass.
- 10) Fragebogen in 2-1-facher Ausfertigung, mit Schreibmaschine aus-
gefüllt und mit Tinte Unterschrieben.
11) Lebenslauf in 2-1-facher Ausfertigung in spanischer Sprache,
mit Maschine geschrieben und mit Datum und Unterschrift versehen.
12) Inhaltsaufstellung des unbegleiteten Reisegepäcks - Unzugsguts
8-7-fach, in spanischer Sprache, mit Maschine angefertigt (s.Cir-
cular N28).
13) Dokumente, die Ihren Beruf bestätigen.
14) Schriftliche Referenzen.
15) Für Minderjährige (unter 21 Jahren) notariell beglaubigte Ein-
willigungserklärung des Vaters, der Erzielungsberechtigten, dass
die Reise nach Chile und der Aufenthalt dort gestattet sind.
N.S. Durchgestrichene Angaben sind nicht zutreffend..
=

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_174.jpeg ---
14.00000
An das
Konsulat von Peru.
Frankfurt am Main
Guiollettstrasse 10.
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962.
Sehr geehrter Herr Konsul:
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprograms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Peru inter-
essiert sind. Ich waere Ihnen daher sehr zu Dank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so eingehend als moeglich
informieren wuerden:
`1.) Vorgang zur Frwerbung eines Finreisevisums unter Seifuegung:
von Mustern saemtlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen.
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in Pera
ansaessig sein muss, um die peruanische Staatsbuergerschaft
au erwerben.
3.) Hat Ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf
die Einwanderungsquote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
4
5.) Muss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestimate Mindestsumme an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das fimwanderungsvis:ms ausgestellt
wird?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand des Ein-
wanderers.
Fuer. Ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im Voraus.
¡
Mit vorsceglicher Hochachtung
A. G. Elmendorf
Executive Director
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_171.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
b) Die ausländische Ehefrau eines Chilenen wird als Inhaberin einer Visa
cion de RESIDENTE TEMPORARIO betrachtet, wenn sie mit einem chilenischen
Pass nach Chile kommt oder im Pass ihres Ehemannes eingetragen ist.
Die Visurgebühren betragen 36,20 pro Pass.
VISACION DE INL:IGRACION (Einwanderungsvisum)
Nach dem chilenischen D. F. L. Nr. 69 (Gesetz Nr.69) wird das Einwanderungsvi-
sum solchen Personen erteilt, die mit ihrer Familie nach Chile auswandern
um dort eine selbständige Tätigkeit technischer Art oder auf einem sonsti-
gen Spezialgebiet auszuüben. Das Visum berechtigt zu einem unbefristeten
Aufenthalt und zur Berufsausübung in Chile.
b) Bei der Begutachtung der Vergünstigungen für Einwanderer wird der Faktor
Arbeit vor dem Faktor Kapital bewertet.
c) Das Umzugsgut des Einwanderers ist, abgesehen von einer kleinen Gebühr
zoll- und steuerfrei und auch frei von Lagergebühren.
d) Zur Beantragung des Visums sind die besonderen Bedingungen zu erfüllen,
die aus unserem Circular Nr. 3 hervorgehen. Insbesondere ist die "Cartilla
de Inmigración" vorzulegen ( die Formulare werden vom Konsulat ausgegeben),
die in zweifacher Ausfertigung mit Maschine in spanisch auszufüllen ist.
e) Die Visumgebühren betragen DWM 9,lo pro Pass.
Bei der Anfertigung der Gepäckliste für ein Einwanderungsvisum ist folgendes.
zu beachten:
1) Wenn das Visum bei dem Konsulat beantragt wird, dann ist die Gepäckliste
in 7 Exemplaren anzufertigen. Wird das Visum in Chile beantragt, so genü-
gen: 5 Exemplare, die bei Visumerteilung vorzulegen sind. Die vorgeschrie-
bene Form geht aus unserem Circular Kr.8 hervor.
2) Die Cepackliste darf mur Gegenstände zum persönlichen Bedarf und zur Berufs-
ausübung enthalten, die vor Erteilung des Visums Eigentum des Einwanderers
waren und aus seinem Herkunftsland stammen. Es muß sich um gebrauchte Ge-
genstände har.deln. In Ausnahmefällen können sie neu sein, doch mussen sie
vor der Visumerteilung erworben worden sein.
(3) Unter Gegenständen zur Berufsausübung sind nur solche zu verstehen, die der
Fortsetzung der Tätigkeit dienen, die der Auswanderer bisher in Deutschland
ausgeübt hat.
4) Es können Haushaltsgegenstände mitgenommen werden, jedoch nur in einem der
jeweiligen Situation des Einwanderers angemessenen Rahmen.
6.) In Ausnahmefällen kann der Einwanderer ein Motorfahrzeug mitnehmen. Es kann
ein Lastkraftwagen, Jeep, Tempowagen oder Lieferwagen sein. Lastkraftwagen,
Jeep und Tempowagen können zollfrei eingeführt werden, jedoch für einen
Lieferwagen sind loo% des FOB-Wertes zu zahlen. Personenwagen oder andere
Fahrzeuge kann der Einwanderer nicht mitnehmen. Er kann jedoch auch einen
Traktor mitnehmen, wenn dieser für seine Tätigkeit erforderlich ist..
7) Das Unzugsgut darf keine Kunst- oder Luxusgegenstände, wie 2.3. echte Teppi-
che, Gobelins, Musikschränke, etc. enthalten.
::
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_172.jpeg ---
14-00000
ALLGEMEINES
Das Konsulat läßt mur in den Fällen den Interessenten Antragsformulare
zugehen, wenn genaue Anhaltspunkte rekannt sind und mit der loglichkeit
einer Genehmigung zur Visumerteilung zu rechnen ist. Sie werden jedoch
nicht auf Anfragen allgemeiner Art zugesandt.
2) Zur Beantragung eines Visuns bitten wir nur die Unterlagen einzureichen,
die in unserem Circular Ir. 3 argekreuzt sind. Die übrigen Unterlagen sind
erst zur Visumerteilung vorzulegen. Zur Antragstelling empfehlen wir die
Unterlagen nach vorheriger schriftlicher Anmeldung persönlich im Konsulat
vorzulegen.
3) Bei schriftlichen Anfragen bitten wir in jedem Fall einen iréfumschlag bei
zufügen.
4) Un persönliche Auskünfte einzuholen, bitten wir um vorherige schriftliche
Anmeldung für einen werktag außer Samstag, 9 Uhr.
5) Zur Visumerteilung ist in jeden Fall die persönliche Anwesenheit der be-
treffenden Fersonen (mit Ausnahme von Kindern unter 15 Jahren) erforder-
lich.
6) Obwohl die Einreisegenehmigung vom chilenischen Auferministerium erteilt
wird, behält sich das Chilenische Generalkonsulat das Recht vor, die Rich-
tigkeit der gemachten Angaben zu prüfen.
7) Für alle Visumarten wird ein internationaler Pockenimpfschein benötigt, der
von einem Amtsarzt ausgestellt sein muß. Seine Gültigkeitsdauer Leträgt
2 Jahre.
8) Minderjährige (unter 21 Jahren) benötigen, wenn sie nicht in Begleitung des
Erziehungsberechtigten reisen, eire notariell beglaubigte Einwilligungser-
klärung des Vaters oder sonstigen Erziehungsberechtigten, die die Reise ins
Ausland und den Aufenthalt dort gestattet.
9) Das Konsulat nimmt keine Arbeitsvermittlung für Chile vor. Es empfiehlt In-
teressenten unverbindlich, sich an folgende leatschsprachige Zeitung zu
wenden.
1
!
CONDOR
Casilla 9469
Santiago de Chile
ULADO
GENERAL
IV
FRANCFORT
DE
CHILE
Hochachtungsvoll
.A.
Enrique Melkonian C.
0бnsul

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_175.jpeg ---
14-00000
Consulado del Peru
Re.: Immigration to Peru
Translation from Germa
Frankfurt/Main
Guiollettstrasse 10
September 7, 1962
Gentlemeni
There are no special application forms for an immigration visa.
The applicant appears in person at the nearest Consulate of Peru
with the following documents:
a) Travel Document and 3 passport photos
b) Birth certificate
c) Proof that the applicant has sufficient means to pay for his
transportation, as well as his living expenses for at least
two years. As minimum living costs we figure 500 DM per month
per person. A work contract can also be supplied as proof of
the above.
d) Medical certificate issued by a health officer not more than
months before submission to the Consulate.
'
Certificate of small-pox vaccination, issued not longer than
2 years before submission to Consulate
f) Police waiver covering the past 10 years
g.) Certificate of good conduct (Leumundszeugnis)
Visa fees amount to DM 180.- plus possible telegram fees.
2.) The citizenship of Peru can be acquired only if the applicant
has resided without interruption for at least four years in Peru
and can prove that he has served the country(?). Further 10 sponsors
are required.
3.) We do not know about any restrictions under the immigration quota.
4.) We do not know any special professions in demand.
5.) See Paragraph 1 c
6.) See Paragraph 4

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_167.jpeg ---
14-00000
z
General
1.)
e Consulate sends out foms for application for an imigration visa
only in such cases where exact details are already known and it seems
likely that a visa vill be issued Application forms are not sent out
solely upon reques
A
2) In order to file a visa application we request to submit only those
documents marked with a cross in Circular Nr. 3. The remaining documents
are to be produced only a
produced only at the time the visa will be issued. It is
recommended to submit the documents necessary for filing an a lication
sin person at the Consulate & foregoing written announcement.
3.) In the case of written inquiries we request that a stamped envelop be
enclosed with the inquiry.
L.) For apersonal appearance we request a written announcement for
working day, except Saturday, at nine AM.
5.) For the issue of the visa te presence of all persons involved is
necessary (excluding children under 15 years of age.)
6.) Though the immigration visa is to be approved by the Chilean Foreign
Ministry the Chilean General Consulate has the right to check the
immigrant's dats.
7.) For all types of visa an international certificate of small-pöx
vaccination is necessary. Such certificate is good for two years.
8.) Persons under 21 years of age need a permit by the father or the
person in charge which must te certified by a notary, if the ar licant
intends to travel without his parents of the persons in charge of him,
9.) The Consulate does not assist in finding work. It is recommended that
potential applicants contact the German langua
the German language newspaper
CONDOR:
Casilla 9469
Santiago de Chile

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_177.jpeg ---
14-00000
avengar tamam v
erfeben können, was für 1:
Fregeboran
* Mben dieses Morsun leider
senden.de
Anweisung des
Zein Visum u
Visum ausgest
gotá vom
Funkt 2)
Fl. Arbeitsch an das
Ant
taatsbürgerschaftsfragen
Hasburg
sburg beantwortet werde
alies
cht zu-
entzu
in
in Se
sulat in
Punkt 3)
Anschrift: Vorletzte Seite des sigefügten Prospektes
Hunkt
siche Punkt (3)
siche Punkt 3)
Funkt.5)
Eir
siehe Funct 3)
- 4. SEP 1962
Erni
DE COL
:
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_178.jpeg ---
14-00000
Venezuela
has been closed
for inngiation
since 1960
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962
An das
Geñeralkonsulat von Venezuela
Hamburg 13
Hagedornstrasse 22
Sehr geehrter Herr Generalkonsul
Im Rahmen un
unseres Auswanderungsprogramms uer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Venezuela
interessiert sind. Ich waere ihnen daher sehr zu Dank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so eingerend als moeglich
informieren wuerdens
1.) Vorgang zur Frwerbung eines Einwanderervisums unter Bei-
fuegung von Mustern saemtlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen.
.
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waohrend derer der Betreffende in Venezuela
ansaessig sein muss, um die Staatsbuergerschaft Ihres Landes
gu erwerben.
3.) Hat ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf die
Finreisequote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt.
5.) Muss der Einwanderer ueber eine bestimmte Mindestaumme an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Finwanderungsvisum ausgestellt
wird?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand des Ein-
wanderers.
Fuer ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im voraus.
Mit vorzueglicher Hochachtung
A. G. Elmendorf
Executive Director.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_179.jpeg ---
14-00000
An das
Consulat der Resublik Ecuador
Frankfurt am Main
Taunusanlage 16
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962
Sehr geehrter Herr Konsuls
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprograms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Persoren, die an einer Auswanderung nach Ecuador inter-
essiert sind. Ich waere Ihnen daher sehr zu Dank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie nich ueber folgende Punkte so eingehend als moeglich in-
formieren wuerden:
1.) Vorgang zur Irwerbung eines Finreisevisums unter Beifuegung
von Mustern saentlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen..
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in Ecuador
ansaessig sein muss, un die Staatsangehcerigkeit Ihres Landes
zu erwerben.
3.) Hat ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf
die Einwanderungsquote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Muss der Einwanderer ueber eine bestimate Mindestsumme an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Einwanderungsvisum ausgestellt
wird?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand des Ein-
wanderers.
Fuer Ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im voraus.
Mit voraueglicher Hochachtung
A. G. Flmendorf
Executive Director
E

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_18.jpeg ---
Dalmante #ventable
She
TATA
14-00000
S-S-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTUR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
30 January 1964
TDE:
1000 hours
PLACE:
ANCONGEN
COMMENTS
762
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
C
and Subject met at the American Consulate since
Subject's apartment (DRC's former safe apartment) is being
painted Subject told C. O. he had been staying at the
Balmoral Hotel and would move back into the apartment on
Friday evening, 31 January 1964. C. O. and Subject went to
the apartment which is indeed being painted and
repapered.
C. O. paid Subject DM 1,000, DM 800 of which is for
subsistence and rent for February and the remaining DM 200
to be applied to the one month's rent in advance required
by the landlord.
C. O. told Subject that all copies but one of his original
political recognition interview story had been recalled and
.
-
: the German language version of his Libenslauf was now being.
used to provide the basis for a new story. C. O. told Subject
that as soon as the new story was prepared, copies placed in
the various files and the one remaining copy of the old story
removed from its file, Subject would be for all practical
purposes, his own boss.
C. O. told him that we have decided to help him get a new
start by (1) paying the cost of having his denture repaired,
(2) by paying DM 200 on the DM 300 one month's rent in advance
Subject must pay, (3) by providing DM 800 per month for
subsistence and housing until he can be legally on his own,
(4) by giving him at least one month's notice prior to
termination and (5) by making him a present of all the household
items now in the apartment including the iron, the vacuum
cleaner, and the radio. Subject's rather perfunctory thank you
was somewhat less than what C. 0. had expected and when C. O.
expressed surprise at Subject's lack of enthusiasm, Subject
stated that he was most appreciative but was not very demonstrative.
i
SECE
Ethet 21:2

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_181.jpeg ---
14-00000
Go
Then shouls go
To B.M.
70
An das
Generalkonsulat von Paraguay
Hamburg 13
Jungfrauenthal 24 I
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962
Sehr geehrter Herr Generalkonsuls
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprograms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Paraguay
interessiert sind. Ich waere ihnen daher sehr zu Pank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie mich neber folgende Punkte so eingehend als moeglich
informieren wuerden:
1.) Vorgang zur Erwerbung eines Einwanderervisuns unter Beifucgung.
von Mustern sentlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen.
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in Paraguay
ansaessig sein muss, un die Staatsbuergerschaft Ihres Landes
su erwerben..
3.) Hat Ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf
die Einwanderungsquote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Muss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestimmte Miniestsume an
Gelmitteln verfuegen, che das furwanderungsvisum ausgestellt
wird?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand dės
Fimwanderers.
Fuer Thr freundliches Entgegenkomen in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im voraus.
Mit vorsweglicher Rochachtung
A. G. Flmendorf
Executive Director

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_176.jpeg ---
14-00000
das
Konsulat von Kolumbien
Frankfurt am Main
Am Hauptbahnhof 10
rankfurt/Main
31 August 1962
ehr geehrter Herr Konsul:
Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprogramms
Fluechtlinge haben
ri einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Kolumbien
interessiert sind. Ich waere. Ihnen daher sehr zu dank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so eingehend als moeglich in-
formieren wuerden:
1.) Vorgang aur Frwerbung eines Einreisevisums unter Beifuegung
von Mustern saemtlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen,
A.
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in Bolmbten
ansaessig sein muss, um die kolumbianische Staatsbuergerschaft
su erwerben.
3.) Het Ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf die
Einwanderungsquote?
1.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Muss der Einwanderer ueber eine bestimmte Mindestsumme an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Finwanderungsvisum ausgestellt
wird?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand des Ein-
wanderers.
Fuer Ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im voraus
Mit vorzueglicher Hochachtung
A. G. Elmendorf
Executive Director

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_185.jpeg ---
14-00000
An das
Vice-onsulat von Uruguay
Frankfurt am Main
Hattersheimer Strasse 2
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962
Sehr geehrter Herr Vice-Konsuls
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprogramms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Uruguay inter-
essiert sind. Ich waere Ihnen daher sehr zu Dank verpflichtet, wenn
Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so eingehend als moeglich informieren
wuerden:
1.) Vorgang zur Erwerbung eines Einreisevisums unter Beifuegung
von Mustern saentlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen.
2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in Uruguay
ansaessig sein muss, um die Staatsbuergerschaft ihres Landes.
zu erwerben.
3.) Hat Ihr Land irgendwelche Finschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf die
Finreisequote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Muss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestimate Mindestsume an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Firwanderungsvisum ausgestellt
wird?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand des Ein-
wanderers.
Fuer Ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Erteilung der erbeteren
Auskuenite danke ich Ihren im voraus.
Mit vorzueglicher Hochachtung
A. G. Elmendorf
Executive Director

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_180.jpeg ---
14-00000
das
Brasilianische Konsulät
rankfurt am Main
Hochstrasse 53
Frankfurt/Mala
31 August 1962
Sehr geehrter Herr Konsulī
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprogramma fuer Fluechtlinge
haben wir einige Personen, sie an einer Auswanderung nach
Brasilien interessiert sind. Ich waere Ihnen daher sehr
su Bank verpflichtet, wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte
so eingehend als moeglich informieren wuerdent
1.) Vorgang zur Freerbung eines inreisevisums unter Bei-
fuegung von Mustern saemtlicher erforderlicher Frages
bogen.
2.
Anzahl von Jahren waehrend derer der Betreffende
Brasilien ansaessig sein muss, um die brasilianische
Staatsbuergerschaft zu erwerben.
3.) Hat Ihr Lend irgendwelche Finschraenkungen in Hinsicht
auf die Finwanderungsquote?
4.) welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Muss der Einwanderer ueber eine bestimmte Mindestsumme
wan Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Einwanderungsvisum
ausgestellt werden kann?
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand
des Einwanderers,
Fuer ihr fre miliches Entgegenkomen in der Erteilung de
erbetenen Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im voraus
Mit vorzueglicher Hochachtung
0. Elmendorf
Executive Director

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_182.jpeg ---
11.0000
Consulado General del
aquay,
American Friends of
dussian Freedom, Inc
Frankfurt/Main
PRO Fax 5005
ranslation fron
man
vember 26 $1952
Gentlemen:
.
we acknowleage rece:ot of your inquiry concerning the immigration
program for refugees and are glad to answer the following questions:
1.) For immigration a special immigration permit, issued by Instituto
de Reforma Agraria, Asuncion, must be obtained. Only upon receipt
of such permit we will issue an immigration visa. Citizens of
various countries do not need any immigration visa since July 1962.
2.) Citizenship can be obtained upon an uninterrupted stay in the
country for five years.
3.) There are no limitations as to an immigration quota
L.) Preferred professions: ammers and craftsmen, as well as wealthy
persons who wish to invest funs in the countr
5.) Every 1-igrant must have sufficient fun is in order to take care
of his integration.
(6.) The immigrant must be absolutely healthy and must not be handicapped
in any way.
Due to a tremendous work-load we were unable to answer your letter
carlier.
ncerely yours,
Cons::let General of raraguay
hasburg
'

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_183.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
An das
Generalkonsulat von Bolivien
Hamburg 20
Heilvigstrasse 125
Frankfurt/Main
31. August 1962
Sehr geehrte Herr Generalkonsuls
Im Rahmen unseres Auswanderungsprograms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Bolivien
interessiert sind. Ich waere ihnen daher sehr zu Dank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so eingeheni als moeglich
informieren wuerden:
1.) Vorgang zur Erwerbung eines Einwanderervisus unter Beifuegung
von Mustern saentlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen.
2
11
Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der Betreffende in Bolivien
anaaessig sein muss, um die Staatsbuergerschaft Ihres Londes
Bu erwerben
3.) Hat Ihr Land irgendwelche Einschraenkungen in Hinsicht auf die
inreisequote?
4.) Welche Berufe sind gefragt?
5.) Muss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestimite Mindestamme an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das Eimvarderungsvisum ausgestellt
wird?.
6.) Anforderungen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustand des Fin-
wanderers.
Fuer Ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auskuen te danke ich Ihren in voraus.
1
Mit voraueglicher Hochachtung
A. G. Elmendorf
Execu
ive Director

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_184.jpeg ---
140000
Generalkonsulat von Bolivien
Hamburg, 7. Sept 1962
An
American Friends of Russian Freedom
Incorporated
P⭑RANKFURT
Postfach 5005
Ei
MAIN
1 SEP 1962
Erl
Sehr geehrte Herren I
In Beantwortung Ihres Schreibens vom
31.v.M. muessen wir Ihnen, leider mitteilen,
dass wir Ihnen bei Ihrem Auswanderungspro+
gramm nicht behilflich sein koennen. Diese
Auskuenfte wird Ihnen aber das
Ministerio de Inmigración
La Paz / Bolivien
beantworten koennen. Wir bitten Sie deshalb,
sich direkt an das Ministerium zu wenden
und zeichnen
hochachtungsvoll
GENERALKONSULAT VON BOLIVIEN
i.A.
Juchai
fark
(Lenhartz)

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_186.jpeg ---
'
Consulado del Uruguay
En
Frankfurt
nslation from German
September 21, 1962
Dear r Elmendorf
1) See enclosed form (the form was not enclosed)
Permanent residence in the country after legal immigration during
three years for married persons, five years for single
3. There is no immigration quota. The immigration visa is issued
by the Ministry of Interior throug
Interior through the immigration office
4.) Mainly qualified farmers
craftsmen and technicians:
5.) No. However the immigrant must be able to support himself by his
profession or private capital.
6.) A medical examination by the physician of the consulate is required.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
TERMINATION AGREEMENT
The undersigned tereby acknowledges that a contractual relationship
has heretofore existed between him and the Government of the United States
of America (hereinafter referred to as ("the Government") The Government
has fully and completely satisfied all of its obligations to the undersigned.
:
The undersigned on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors, administra
tors and assigns hereby releases and forever discharge the Government, its
officers, agents and employees from any and all debts, claims, benefits or
demands arising out of the above mentioned contractual relationship.
The undersigned fully understands and appreciates the fact that the prior
relationship between the parties and all information and knowledge acquired in
thi course of said relationship (particularly with reference to persons and
methods employed by the Government) are the property of said Government and
constitute
tute military secrets affecting its security. The undersigned knows and
understands that these are protected by German Law under the provisions of
ex A to the Convention on Rights and Obligations of Foreign Forces in the
Federal Republic of Germany.
The Government is highly appreciative of the excellent services hereto-
fore rendered by the undersigned. However, to preserve the security above
mentioned, it is further understood and agreed that both parties shall here-
after disavow that the relationship ever existed.
The undersigned further agrees he possesses no right, title or interest
in any information or knowledge arising out of said relationship and he fur-
ther solemnly swears that he will never divulge, publish or reveal by word,
conduct or any other means the fact of said relationship nor any such knowledge
or
on arising therefrom except as authorized in writing by the sane.
of the Government as that who witnesses this oath.
Frankfort/maines this and day of March 196
Geonoj
F. Sanders
(L.S.)
WITNESS:
William
Ma
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:F
Subject said he had returned to Doctor Filner who said
he could not work on Subject's dentures until approval was
granted
Subject asked if we knew Doctor Feilner's estimate
had been DM 750 CO O. said we knew and that he should go
to the dentist who had given him the DM 400 estimate
C. O. told Subject to obtain receipts for the one month's
rental payment and for the February rental payment
also to call Co O the week of February 2nd to arrange
He was
meeting so that C. O can pick up the receipts and Subject's
copy of his old political recognition interview story
SECRET
-49477
LI

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMO ROUTING SLIP
TITLE
Chief, DRC
ATION AND LOCATION
..
USE FOR APPROVALS DISA PROVALS
SCURRENCES: OR:SIMILAR ACTIONS
DATE
CIRCULATE
COORDINATION
FILE
INFORMATION
RECESSARTY
ACTION
NOTE AND
RETURN
SIGN
I am in agreement with DARONNAT's attached
suggestion. I feel
I feel we will be getting off
cheap in paying:
B.
C.
For the dental work.
Household furnishings per attached
list
1-2 months subsistence
Do you concur?
Concur
FROM MAME OR TITLE
GE
Chief, Resettlement 42
ORGANIZATION, AND LOCATION
DATE
27 Jan 64
TELEPHONE
DD
FORM
1 JEB 50
95
Replan DA AGO Form Bid, 1 Apr cl, and AFBQ
Form 12, 10 Nov 17, which may be und
AGL (1) 18-58-836-67918
F
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
h
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, HARVARD
FROM
ORME K. DARONNAT
SUBJECT
WIROGUE
27 January 1964
Don, I suggest that we reduce the quantity of some of
the items listed on the attached and make WIROGUE a present
of the remainder as part of his resettlement.
I have been emphasizing to Subject over the past weeks
that President Johnson's economy drive has affected all
agencies and departments. Subject, therefore, has been
conditioned not to expect money for BKZ or for furniture or
a termination sum. Any or all of these would normally be
provided in a case of this kind.
I feel that if we pay to have his lower denture repaired,
approximate cost DM 400, make Subject a present of the house
hold items listed, and continue to pay him subsistence for a
month or two after we notify him he is on his own, we will,
I believe, get rid of him as cheaply as possible and without
serious complaints.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
N?:
SECRET
2
28
--
117
X
-
about going to work like any normal person and fiddle with
his inventions at night C. O 0 reminded him that if he had
not been able to come up with a successful invention after
1 1/2 years of our patronage he should get his head out of the
clouds and join the rest of us. By this time Subject was
Later while
beginning to sulk so C. O. took him out to lunch
taking a stroll, Subject stated that if the cold weather
continued he was going to return to the Congo. C. O. hustled
him into Woolworths and bought him some long underwear
A
him into Woolworths and bought him some long underwea
Subject asked if C 0. had been able to get permission to
have his lower plate repaired CO. told him he was to go to
FEILNER between 1130 1230 Wednesday the 23rd of January
for an examination. FEILNER would supply us with an estimate
CO would then get a decision on whether or not we could
help Subject with this problem
C. 0. dropped Subject off downtown.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_22.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
21 January 1964
THE
1200 hours
PLACE: 51 Kuhwaldstr.
COMMENTS:
ORME K. DARONNAT Case Officer
C. O. met Subject and paid him subsistence for the week
ending 31 January 1964. He was told that we have received
permission to increase his subsistence from DM 600 to DM 800
per month until his final resettlement The extra DM 200 is.
to be applied to his rent C. O said that Subject would be
paid DM 1000 on 31 January DN 200 to be applied to one
th's rent in advance, and the DM 800 to be rent (DM 200)
and subsistence (DM600) for February.
C. O. said we were disappointed that he had decided to
stay in his present apartment and take over the DM 300 rent.
We had hoped he would be sensible enough to use this opportunity
to save a little money
.
.
that old be a Subject's answer was that he feels
that he should be able to afford the rent when he is turned
loose and that if he can't afford that much rent he might as
well be dead. Subject said he could not understand why C. O.
was harping on the subject, that all he was asking for was
one month's advance notice prior to being turned loose on his
own.. C. O. said he was willing to drop the matter as long as
Subject did not come crying the blues to us later about needing
money. Subject said that if things got really bad he would
get a job. C. O. applauded and offered his congratulations
but said he assumed this would only be a desperation measure.
Subject did not like the joke.
WIROGUE proudly announced that he has made intensive
efforts the last few weeks to sell 4 of his inventions. C. O.,
somewhat exasperated, told him he would never understand how
such an obviously clever man could, for so many years, refuse
to face up to his responsibilities to himself and society and
live in a dream world of get rich quick schemes. Subject put
on what is now a familiar act in which he acts terribly hurt
because C. O. (his one true friend) does not have faith in him.
C. O. told Subject that he is a great actor and added that he
(C. O.) would think much more highly of him if he would think
SECRET
Erilatooniran zatamatio
TT
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_27.jpeg ---
14-00000
name is Georg Frank Sanders and on the original story
Subject's father's name is given as Simon Sanders the new
Story will indicate that Subject's father's full name is
Frank Simon Sanders which will explain Subject's middle
name as Frank). In the paragraph refering to Subject's
detention by the militia make some reference to Subject's
alleged activities in a resistence group. It is felt that
if Subject's new story ever comes to light in the future,
what was once reported as Subject's activity in a resistence
group will be taken to have been misread and
alleged activity in a Georgian resistence group. We all
group.
realize that if a copy has been made of the story there is
nothing we can do about it anyway.
was only

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
1100 hours
January 1964
On this date Grady Elms, John Spiegler, Don McLaughlin,
Bill Murray and John Wilms (Camp King) met to discuss the
WIROGUE case It was explained to Wilms that we have prepared
a Låbenslauf for Subject and we are ready to take the next
steps necessary for Subject's resettlement and that we wished
to establish if, as Wilms told us some months ago, it would
be possible to prepare a new political recognition interview
story and replace the old copies with the new story. Wilms
said it would be necessary to recover Your copies of the
old story, Comped
Nuern
opy: the
in the hands of the B, but he
felt that this could be done. It was decided that months ago
when the BND became interested in this case that copies had
probably not been made of the story, only extracts to include
Subject's name, his birth date, probably the names of his
te
Subject
parents and an extract of the reference of Subject's activities
with the Georgian Resistence Group. It was decided, therefore,
that this same information should definitely appear in the
new Labenslauf. This was to be taken care of by having
Subject's father's name be Frank Simon Sanders (since Subject's
-
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_25.jpeg ---
1
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
10 January 1964
TDE:
1130 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
ORME K DARONNAT
Case Officer
C
dropped by to see Subject and pay him two weeks
subsistence. Subject asked C. O. what he intended to do
regarding housing for him since the maids had told him the
apartment would be given up 31 January C. O. said he was
aware that the apartment was to be given up and had hoped .
to
to get a month or two extension. C. O. went on to say that
he felt that it could not be done and that he would talk
to his housing people and would contact Subject early the
following week.
C. O. told Subject that his Libenslauf had been completed
and was being translated into German. C. O. feels that the
final step towards Subject's permanent resettlement can be
taken within the next two months
ECRET
i
GBG 1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_24.jpeg ---
24-00000
The Rum Hote
Seing
we
OM 300,00
"Weaning'
S5-C-8-E-T
REPORT ON COMPACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR.
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
15 January 1964
TIME:
1115 hours
PLACE:
Kuwaldstr.
ORME K DARONNAT Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O dropped by and informed Subject we will not
be moving him into any more of our housing
ng that housing
suitable for him is occupied and would not be available
for some time C. O. told Subject that he will give him
800 DM a month instead of the usual 600 DM He is to take
care of housing himself. He was advised to get economy
housing and try to save money since the President's economy
drive was affecting our budget and C. O. could not promise
what kind of help, if any, could be given Subject when he
-
finally leaves our custody. Many months ago C. 0. had
told Subject that upon his final termination we would see
what help could be given him towards apartment rental, dishes,
furniture, etc. C. O. felt that it would be a good idea
to tell Subject that he should not expect a great deal of
help when he leaves us, that he might receive very little,
if any.
C. O. tried to discourage Subject from taking over the
Kuwaldstr apartment, but Subject said he is working on an
invention for the owner of the apartment and would try to
to receive some help if he had to pay rent in advance when
he gets his new quarters. C. O. told him he would pay the
first month's rent in advance but would require the receipt
from Subject.
swing some sort of deal. Subject asked if he could expect
Subject said he would call C. O. as soon as he has
made arrangements for living quarters for himself.
But to
SECRET
GROUP
Excluded from antec
Sin

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_28.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
9-8-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR:
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
13 December 1963
TIME:
1030 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
34
Case Officer
ORME K. DARONNAT
C. 0. dropped in and paid Subject two weeks subsistence
and after a short chat took him to lunch. C. O.
spent several hours window. Shopping and just generally
0. and Subject
buming around Subject's moral was greatly improved as
result and C. O. feels the time was well spent.
Subject said that he has been worried; that he knows he
will be turned loose on his own soon and asked C. O., if
possible, to let him have sufficient notice so he can make
plans. C. O. told him that he would try to give him at
least one month's notice.
:
5
SECRET
CW 1
Excluded t
•Bzzzgraday ans
declassification
t

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_29.jpeg ---
Y
N
14-00000
´S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
29 November 1963
TIME:
1030 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr.
COMMENTS:
Paine
f
Orme K. DARONNAT, Case Officer
C. O. dropped by, paid Subject two weeks subsistence and
thanked him for his note of sympathy regarding the death of
President Kennedy.
.
Subject was told that his background story is complete
and that we hoped we would soon be in a position to take positive
steps toward his resettlement Subject went into a long-
winded explanation of why he thought it was wrong for a man
to pay all his life for a crime when technically he had paid
by serving his prison term. C. O. told him that unfair or not
Subject's misdeeds have placed certain restrictions on his
activities and nothing could be done to change that. He was
reminded that with a new identity he will be in a position to
establish himself and be a contributing member of society.
Subject's answer was to the effect that he was not too happy
to be contributing in Germany.
C. O. knows that the above is Subject's way of letting
C. O. know he would like to be clean as a whistle, be able to
use his true name and go back to France.
C. O. told him that all things considered he could be a
0
lot worse off and should think about building his future.
Subject then stated that he would repay all the money we
had spent on him. C. O. told him that we did not want the
money repayed that he would only foul-up our books. He was
told that the best way for him to repay the debt would be to
work hard and lead a decent life.
soon.
C. O. left after promising to have lunch with Subject
SECRET
Excluded from
dewarding bui
declactiticatica
134
!
3

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_32.jpeg ---


--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_3.jpeg ---
14-000
S-B-C-R-E-T
File WERE
SUBJECT:
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGE
CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
WIROGUE
DATE:
30 September 1964.
TIME:
1030 - 1400 hours
PLACE:
Automobile in the Vicinity
of Kuhwaldstr.
ARTHUR A LIFALL, Case Officer
COMMENTS:
WIROGUE called at approximately 0945 hours on the Stage
Ops phone and asked for Mr. Murmann C.O took the
took the call and was
advised that the caller was "Dave" and that he desired to speak
to a colleague of Mr. Murmann at the earliest possible time
C.O. made arrangements to meet him in front of the safe house
at 51 Kuhwaldstr which WIROGUE occupied during his 1 1/2 year
association with HARVARD (this is no longer a HARVARD safe house).
C.O. did not tell Dave" his name over the telephone and indicated
that ne would be able to recognize "Dave". C.O. picked "Dave"
up on the corner of Volta and Kuhwaldstr and drove a couple of
blocks to a parking place where the conversation took place.
.
•
.
C.O. learned that WIROGUE was no longer employed by the
Boehler Company in Munich. He apparently has had a couple of
factory jobs since that job and is currently unemployed.
According to "Dave" he is without work, without friends, without
money and" only contacted Murmann's old office because he is
at the end of his rope Subject stated that he had tried hard
to find suitable employment in Germany, but that there was
absolutely nothing available which he could do. It was obvious
that WIROGUE wished to renew his association with the AIS and that
"intelligence work" was the only kind of employment for which he
felt himself really qualified. When C.O. indicated to him that the
employment possibilities had not changed since WIROGUE was told
there was no possibility of future employment with the Agency,
Subject said that the purpose of his telephone call was to advise
us of his plans to go to Paris and attemu to contact the
French Intelligence-Service-to which he would offer his services.
He wished to find out if we would have any objections to his
seeking employment from the French or possibly the British since
we are apparently unable to utilize him further. C.O. said that
obviously WIROGUE would do what he would do and that while we
had no control over his actions it would seem a bit surprising
that he would delibertely place himself in the hands of the
French authorities where he was known to have a criminal record.
WIROGUE implied that he would obviously tell all to the French
and indicated that he was not concerned about any actions that
they would take against him. He appeared sure in an extremely
vague and confused way that the French Intelligence Service could
use him.
"

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR:
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
15 November 1963
TIME:
1100 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
ORME K DARONNAT
Case Officer
Co dropped in to see Subject, paid him two weeks
subsistence and provided cigaretts and coffee He was told
that unfortunately we have not finished his legend and it will
be a few more weeks until we can try to replace the old story
with the new. Subject said that he hoped that he can get
started soon because he is getting nervous, just hanging around
and not being gainfully employed He reminded C. O. that
CO had supposedly promised him BKZ and help on new furniture
when he finally moved out on his own C. O. reminded him that
C. O. had not promised him anything at all but had said he
the C. O., would find out if any help could be given Subject
in this area.
.
Subject backed down and then stated that his wish had been
to go to South America and that C. O. had promised him this
would be arranged. C. O. told him that our intention had been
to arrange this for Subject but that it is impossible to
accomplish and the matter would have to be dropped. Subject was
told, as he has been told several times, that if he desires
to go to South America he will have to arrange it on his own
and after he has built up some work experience here in the F.R.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_34.jpeg ---
14-00000
{zéskamrata fracti umaretazi
R
J
1
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
20 September 1963
TIME:
1130 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:"
2
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
0
met Subject and paid him two weeks subsistence.
Subject was in extremely good spirits and seemed quite pleased
to see C. O He stated that things are going better and better
for him that the mechaniker with whom he is working had given
him a new electric razor for having solved a difficult mechanical
problem which had plagued the shop for some weeks Subject
said that he has managed to complete two of his inventions and
another device which he had been working on for the mechaniker
had been completed and worked so well it had been sent to a
display in France. Subject said that he is
making more and more contacts among the technical people here
in Frankfurt and that his worry now is that he might be offered
a good job and won't be able to accept it since he will require
a Lohnsteurkarte and a Versicherungskarte. He then asked C.O.'s
advice as to what could be done regarding this problem. c. o.
said that he is hoping to have an acceptable Labenslauf completed
in the near future and as soon as that story is substituted for
the old he will receive the necessary documents. At that point
he will be free to do anything he wishes as far as work and
housing is concerned.
P
NOTE: C. O. has the necessary tax and insurance cards in his
possession but will not give them to Subject until his Libenslauf
and legal position in Germany is satisfactory. If C. o. gives
Subject the documents now he would probably go to work and besides
earning money would accept our subsistence without notifying C.o.
Subject said he wanted C. O. to understand that he was not
complaining, that he was indeed most grateful for the training
he has received over the past months but he is just as eager as
we are to be on his own making his way in life. C. O. said he
understood and appreciated this fact and hoped that everything
would be in order within the next couple of months.
support
SECRET
68:2-1
Litrdet frum verant
Relat
2:1
'

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_33.jpeg ---
2--
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
October 1963
TDE:
1015 hours
PLACE
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
0. dropped in and paid Subject two weeks subsistence
and found him in high spirits. He has almost compted another
invention which appears to be some type of advertising device
which projects a pre-determined message on a screen.
told Subject that he was in a hurry but would be glad to come
CO
by at a later date to see a demonstration of the device.
SECRET
Ang m
tecaricati
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEROTGUN SPB Yor
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, Stage I
FROM
SUBJECT
3 September 1963
Chief Resettlement Branch
LEGEND MATERIAL REQUIRED FOR WIROGUE'S
RESETTLEMENT
1. Since May 1962 HARVARD has been attempting to
work out a sound resettlement for WIROGUE. Headquarters
had authorized HARVARD to assist Subject in his desire to
immigrate to South America. As the first step in this
program, Subject was interviewed at Camp King and a story
adequate to insure West German political recognition was
presented to the German interviewer. Certain details of this
story aroused the interest of the German government and it
was necessary for steps to be taken to kill this unwanted
interest. This development would not in itself have been
too much of a problem, but in subsequent investigation of
the procedure to be followed for immigration to South America,
HARVARD learned that applicants are screened very thoroughly,
given aptitude tests, etc. etc. This screening is performed
by ICEM who is charged by the South American countries with
the responsibility for insuring that any immigrant is
thoroughly desirable. It became obvious to HARVARD that
Subject would require a legend sufficient to withstand detailed
interviews and sufficient to qualify him in some profession
on the basis of his actual ability the existing political
recognition story does not provide this.
:
In discussions with Wilms and Wagner of the 513th,
it was decided that a detailed life story should be prepared
by CABEZONE and on the basis of this story a new political
2.
'
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_31.jpeg ---
S-E-C-R-S-T
PEPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
1 November 1963
TIME:
1100 hours
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr Apartment
ORME K. DARONNAT Case Officer
CƠMENTS:
C 0. dropped in to see Subject, gave him cigaretts and
300 marks subsistence for the next two weeks. He was told
that his legend is just about completed, that it is now being
proof read and that our next step would be to have it accepted
by the German authorities. When this has been accomplished
all obstacles to his final resettlement will have been removed.
MA
Subject said that he had been thinking a great deal lately
about being turned loose on his own in the near future He
said that he hopes to have
the point where he wille his latest invention perfected to
be receiving a substantial income at
the time he leaves us. C. O. told him that it seemed liked
he still is trying everything he can to keep from going to
work, that he still is placing too much emphazis on "get rich
quick" schemes. Subject denied that this was the case but
C. O. does not believe him.
-
co. wished him luck in his plans but advised him that
when it was time for him to be on his own he would not be given
a long transition périod. Subject said that up to now he has
been working for the work shop owner without receiving pay of
any kind but that sooner or later he would be receiving a check
and asked what he should do when this happened. C. O. told him
that he could see no problem in that if he cannot be paid in
cash there is no reason why he couldn't take a check in the name
of Sanders and cash it since he is registered at Camp King.
Subject said that it might be in a kind of a check that is paid
directly to ones bank account. C. O. told him that the answer
to that was simple, that he should say that he has no bank
account.
C. O. doesn't know what Subject was trying to get at but
is sure that he has something in mind. He then asked C. O. to
find out what the rent would be on the Kuhwaldstr apartment,
SECRET
67521
i
Excluded from alternat
declectication.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_37.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
S-B-C-R-5-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
23 August 1963
TDE:
1030
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
242
Comet Davonnat
ORME K. DARONNAT Case Officer.
Case Officer dropped in to see Subject and paid him
two weeks subsistence. Subject was very excited due to his
success in applying for a patent, for a new type soup dish.
Case Officer took great pains to praise Subject highly because
he is aware that this has been a tremendous psychological
boost for WIROGUE who was beginning to doubt his ability.
Subject for a long time has been attempting to get a
patent but could not come by the necessary funds, approximately
200 DM. Case Officer asked him how he was able to swing this
and was told the following story, some of which Case Officer
already knew:
During the months that Subject has been in
HARVARD's hands, he has kept himself busy by inventing
various gadgets and devices. Some months ago he made
contact with a mechaniker, Alfred Naegele, who has a
work shop on 25 Glauburgstr. Subject has had this
individual make certain small parts which Subject was
not able to make, due to a lack of tools. Over the
past months, Subject has won the confidence of Naegele
and has been exchanging his labor for permission to
use the work shop facilities. Subject has also solved
job problems for the work shop owner who has now
begun to take on specialized jobs only because he has
Subject's talent and ability available to him. Subject
continues to help Herr Naegele gratuitously since he
feels that in time he will make the contacts which will
be of help to him when he is finally on his own. Subject
told Case Officer that one of Naegele's contacts had
prepared the technical description and application for
Subject's soup dish invention without cost to Subject.
Subject will pay off the cost by helping Herr Naegele.
Subject feels he can use this same procedure to patent
other ideas which he has.
Hin
SECRET
60001
Crited metanatio

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_36.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
+
recognition interview should be written which would replace
those copies of the old interview now in the various files
A reasonably complete legend previously prepared by Alex
Lembersky is attached and with additional information can
be used almost as is. Since this life story will be notional,
it will have to be written up in sufficient detail and
plausible enough to provide Subject with the information
needed for the filling out of various future job applications
to stand-up under detailed interviews to which he may in the
future be subjected and, if immigration ever takes place, to
satisfy those requirements
requirements. HARVARD feels that this can only
properly be prepared by a native born Russian. HARVARD, there-
fore, requests Chief, Stage I to assign a Stage I interrogator
knowledgeable on the Soviet Union to prepare a life story to
include a detailed escape from Georgia to Turkey.
3 We realize that this request could involve considerable
work but due to the peculiar problems inherent in the WIROGUE
case, it is vital that we prepare Subject for a new life as
a completely different person. Only by doing the job properly
now will we be able to place ourselves in a position to
satisfactorily sever subject's dependence upon KUBARK and
reduce to a minimum the need for future contacts.
Attachment:
Legend
cc:
Chief, DRC
Ad
G. Donald McLaughlin
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_38.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
SECRET
Case Officer noticed that on the patent application,
Subject was listed as an engineer living at Kuhwaldstr 51.
When Case Officer questioned him regarding the use of this
Kuhwaldstr address Subject said that he felt it was necessary
for the following reasons:
I' While riding with Naegele to the Taunus
one day and passing Camp King, Herr Naegele
had remarked that the Camp was the place where
Americans trained commandos and others for
work of a secret nature
2. Since Case Officer had told Subject many
months ago that we intended to give up the
Kuhwaldstr apartment and he Subject wanted to
do everything he could to make arrangements to
establish himself on his own he had decided it
would be best to use the Kuhwaldstr address
because he would be receiving mail and did not
want to inconvenience Case Officer by having
him be a delivery boy.
3. Subject felt that the use of this address
would not break security since he would not use
that address for any official reason, e.g.,
police matters, etc., etc.
Case Officer still reamed Subject out thoroughly and told
him that even though our attempts to maintain maximum security
were probably 50% successful we should at least try. Case
Officer finally realized he was fighting a losing battle and
would succeed in antagonizing Subject and if nothings make
more difficulties for himself and told Subject they might as
well drop the subject. Subject kept insisting that he would
do nothing to jeopardize what Case Officer's organization was
trying to do for him and assured Case Officer he thinks out
very carefully what the results of any particular course of
action might be.
Case Officer told Subject that he is trying to complete
his legend and once everything is in order with the German
government Subject would be in a position to establish himself.
Case Officer told him that it is obvious his hopes for
immigration to South America should be shelted for a good long
time, that it would appear obvious Subject should establish
himself here in Germany building up a work background and then
if he so desired, immigrate. This would be without our help..
1
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_39.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
be
Case Officer said that his legend should sufficient to
satisfy any further inquiries he might run into. Subject
asked what Case Officer's plans were for going to work and
finding a a place to live and asked what Case Officer's help
would consist of. Case Officer told him that
Case Officer told him that he would find
his own employment and that since he would not know whether
Subject should or would want to commit himself to a long
term lease on an apartment, that Case Officer would probably
recommend that Subject be given a couple of thousands of marks as
a resettlement sum This could be used by Subject at any time
and in any way he sees fit but would eliminate the need for
him to return to Case Officer for help towards an apartment
etc Case Officer said his goal was to legalize Subject's
case so that there would be no need for him in the future to
come to us for help.
us for help.
.
Subject asked just how good the legalization would be,
would he be able to go to other countries and if not, then
the exercise is a waste of time. Case Officer feels that the
reason for Subject's question is that he would probably attempt
to immigrate to the U.S. Sometime in the future. Also he
claimed that he brought up the question only to find out if he
could go to other countries on a visitors visa if he makes
contact with a firm that would require him to do so in the
course of his duties. Case Officer told him that he would.
investigate these problems in due course but felt that Subject
could probably get visitors or tourist permits to all the
countries without any difficulty but if he applied for
immigration to some country whose investigations require
fingerprints and a check of Interpols, Subject would then be
in trouble up to his ears (HARVARD has ascertained that Subject
is not on file with Interpolg but has not told Subject this
since we may want to use the threat of being listed with
Interpole as a future control.)
SECRET
--

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
:
SUBJECT:
WIROUGE
DATE:
26 July 1963
TIME:
1030
PLACE:
51 Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
Domet
Diren
Orme K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
A
Case Officer dropped in to see Subject, gave him
coffee, cigaretts, etc. and paid him two weeks subsistance.
Subject said that he had run into difficulty with his invention
and has been busy redesigning certain parts. Some time ago
Subject made contact with a man who has a work shop and does
Specialized developmental work for various factories in the
area. Subject has from time-to-time had certain parts made in
this work shop Subject says that he no longer can afford to
pay the price this man asks and has made a deal with him whereby
he helps the man out in his work shop and receives the time as
credit toward any job Subject wants done. Subject told Case.
Officer that if he needed to contact him at any time and did not
find him at home he could be reached at 558925 by calling and
asking for Mr. Sanders.
2. Case Officer told Subject that his Legend is coming
along pretty well and Case Officer feels that with a little
luck we will be able to take definite steps toward his more or
less permanent resettlement. Case Officer promised to spend
more time with Subject when they meet again two weeks from
today.
SECF
1
66
Excludeš iran aƏRBİN
DeWALT 5
declass

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_40.jpeg ---
14-00000
[
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE: 9 August 1963
TDE:
1030
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
2
ORME K DARONNAT, Case Officer
...
Case Officer dropped in to see Subject and paid him
two weeks subsistance. Subject was not in the best of
spirits. He said he has lots of ideas but no one will
talk to him unless he has a patent and since patents
cost money he is becoming more and more frustrated.
Case Officer suggested that he try to locate individuals
who put up capital for development and patent expenses for
Subject said he has
a percentage of the future earnings
been investigating this possibility but so far has had no
success
Case Officer told him to try to be patient that Case
Officer hopes to have his legend finished in the near
future and take steps for his complete legalization in
West Germany.
SECRET
649:21
Excluded tram silarastic)
Cowzgrating 106
declassification

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
In the course of the lengthy discussions WIROGUE let it
be known that he was not very happy about the treatment he
had received from the Americans--that he felt he had been
dropped, and it appeared obvious to C.O. that if we had no
further work for him he was threating to tell his story to the
French authorities--a story which he presumably feels we would
to know about It should be stressed that
not like the Frenckmail threat" bluntly presented. It was
at no time was the
merely that he wished to advise us of his plan to leave for
Paris this date with this intention in mind and that he wished
to determine if we had any objections"
-
C.O. xafasad reviewed with WIROGUE the considerable efforts
which had been made to assist him in establishing a new life here
In the FEDREP a new life story, legal documentation, the hspaxta
more than
tsak opportunity to look for employment for a period of
etc. C.O. told
year while receiving subsistence from us
Subject that he obviously had a good mind and was in good health
and that--if he was unable to find some type of employment in
the thriving West German economy that appealed to him thara and
satisfied him--he would probably be unhappy wherever he goes.
C.C. discounted Subject's belief that "intelligence work" was
the only thing for which he was suited. C.O. ap expressed the view
that he should get his head out of the clouds and his feet on
the ground--that he should find a job, however mental, and throw
himself into it. At this point WIROGUE said that ✓ at one time
he had told Mr. Murmann of his desire to become a driver or
chauffer but that Mr. Murmann told him he could find much more
suitable employment. With a certain amount of disbelief C.O.
pursued this topic with him telling WIROGUE that-if he was
really serious that in believing that this kind of employment
would be satisfying to him, that it was the first sensible thought
he had expressed in the course of the discussions and that C.O.
would determine whether it would be possible to assist Subject in
obtaining a West German drivers's license (Subject indicated that
he had a Congo drivers license when he arrived in Frankfurt
While Subject pretended
although it was issued in another name). While Subject
to have a genuine interest in obtaining such employment-- and
used this to refute C.O.'s accusation that he only wanted to start
at the top and considered most kinds of honest employment as
being beneath him--C.O. is highly skeptical of Subject's motives.
WIROGUE was told to call Makяя±±я Mac (this is the only name
which C.O gave to WIROGUE) on the following day (Thursday, 1
October) and C.O. would ɛza let him know whether he could help
WIROGUE was-quick-to-point-out
Shim obtain a West German license.
that
.
."
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_43.jpeg ---
.14-00000.
Tenu
:
S-E-C-R-S-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE:
28 June 63
TIME:
1145
PLACE
Kuhwaldstrasse
ORME K DARONNAT, Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C.O. dropped into see Subject and paid him subsistence
for the next two weeks.
Subject informed C.O. he had gone to the electrical
firm BRAUN and had asked to see the Director of Research
and Development. Surprisingly enough he was granted an
audience with the "Great Man" and was allowed to explain
his invention (electric dictionary). The Director was
interested and told Subject he would discuss the idea
with his engineering panel. If they were interested Sub-
ject would be contacted. C.O. said that he should negotiate
for a job that resettling him in Germany would appear to be
his best bet since he has more going for him here than he
would in South America.
C.O. said he was working on his story (legend) and
would recommend to Headquarters that Subject resettle in
Germany with help toward BKZ and furniture.
:
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_44.jpeg ---
14-00000
·S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
14 June 1963
TIME:
1300
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstrasse
Orme K DARONNAT.
Case Officer
=
C.O. met Subject and took him to lunch. He was told
COMMENTS: CO
that C. O. was convinced that Subject would forget about
Emigrating to South America for the present and should con
centrate on settling here in Germany. Co. O. pointed out
that he spoke German and could probably get a good job here
but that if he went to S. A. he had few real prospects and
the fact that if he did not speak Russian he would be suspect
in the eyes of the russian emigrees there.
C. O. told him that it was his opinion we should prepare
a good story to replace the one he has now but to make sure
that it would not require that he know a great deal of Russian
so that if he should go to S. A. at a later date he would not.
have to study too long. C. O. said he would still notify Hqs.
and see if they are willing to subsidize 6 mos. intensive
Russian language training. If not we would concentrate on
getting him established here and then at a later date discuss
S. A. emigration. C. O. said he would also recommend that
Subject be helped toward furniture and BKZ if he remains
in Germany.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
28 May 1963
WIROGUE
2.
Alex Lembersky and sill Murray discussed the legend possibilities
for WIROGUE It was established that since Subject speaks no
Russian it is impossible to build a legend due to the fact that
the simplest Arbeiter in the Soviet Union can speak some Russian.
2
3.
was decided that:
Rogue should be given an intensive course of Russian language
instruction;
He be sent to Chile through
John
connections
He be told that nothing can be done for him and he be
ori
resettled on the local economy
=
Orme K. Daronnat
!

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_42.jpeg ---
4-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
12 July 1963
TIME:
1130
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr
COMMENTS:
Orme K DARONNAT
Case Officer
:
SHASISTANTS Case Officer dropped in to see Subject; paid him
nce for the next two weeks and gave him
cigaretts, coffee, booze, etc. Subject is still
dilligently on his invention (Electric Dictionary) which
working
is making slow, but as he says steady progress..
it could go much faster but he is limited by a lack of
He says
money and therefore must be content with doing a little at
a time Case Officer asked him if he had heard from Braun.
Subject answered no but was not surprised since the Chief
timent and Development told him it could be several
weeks before they contacted him. Case Officer said that he
hoped that he could COMPLETE A WORKING MODEL
-of his
invention because very likely no firm would really become
interested unless he had a good working instrument to
demonstrate. Case Officer told Subject that we had worked
out a pretty good legend for him but there were a few
necessary details to be added. Subject asked for an estimate
as to how long his status quo would remain as is, because
he would hate to be thrown out on the street without a chance
to prepare for it. Case Officer, told him that he had nothing
to fear in this respect tha
the story was ready and
Camp King the necessary action Case Officer would then
inform Headquarters that his recommendation is to resettle
Subject on the local economy with a reasonable amount of
BKZ and help toward the purchase of furniture. Subject asked
if this entire processing would take six months. Case Officer
said it was possible that in any event Subject would be
given adequate time to establish himself; i.e. finding a job,
.etc. Case Officer promised to see him definitely within
two weeks.
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_45.jpeg ---
14-00000
WIROGUE
7 June 1963
1200 hours
Kuhwaldstr.
CO dropped in to see Subject and found him in an
exceptionally good mood.
CO
He remarked that he was beginning to feel like a charity
case and asked how long he would be on our hands
told him that there were three possibilities:
2.
3.
Subject could three b
Subject could stay right here in Germany, find
himself a job and CO would find out what help
Headquarters would provide in the way of help toward
an apartment and furniture.
Subject would have to study Russian for six months,
since it is impossible for anyone to have been
raised and worked in the Soviet Union without knowing
some Russian. At the end of that time he would try
to process him for S.A. (Subject was not told this but
it is obvious that if he does not know Russian,
once he gets to S.A., the first. Russian he comes in
contact with will realize he is not a bona fide.
refugee which would lead to trouble for Subject.)
.
There is a possibility he could be gotten to Chile.
(John Wilms has suggested that through his contacts
he might be able to get Subject to Chile, since the
Chilean Ambassador owes him a favor.)
CO told Subject to think about the three possibilities
and make and give CO his thoughts on the problem the next
time they meet.
Orme K. Daronnat
f
:
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_49.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: TIROGUE
DATE:
10 Kay 1963
TDE:
1100
PLACE:
Kuwaldstr.
COMMENTS
On
Crae
Daronnat
Case Officer
CO dropped: in to see Subject and found him busy as usual
working on his inventions.
36
He was told that we are making slow
but sure progress toward his eventual immigration. Subject said that
he had been to the Zentralstelle für Arbeitsvermittlung and had
picked up some information re immigration to South America. ( CO
took a look at the caterial and saw that it tended to verify the
info that Jack R. had given us re inmigration and work opportunities).
CO will see Subject again on Friday the 17th.
Thurs. 16
2.0. snapped by to tell Suly: he would not
ree his until 23
23n
3 may.
Suly. & Wiesbaden for his morale.
Thurs. 23
C.O. took
was
after heal and a walk in the fork Suby..
return his apt.
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
WIROGUE
Tuesday 21 May 1963
C.O explained to John Wagner (ching) that
for
Selects story, outh less of while pot meg.
recog
granted,
would be built wwwf it. A good life stray with
ridiculars that no decent legend
will
grate
be an abombats necessity of Suly . in to winge
though I CEN
to citify
South Que
John W. suggested that the story be permitter
our purposes. The story and them be
pompared at Camp King for Rudy's agnatives.
The old story would then be removed from
the
eplaced beg
KRIPUS and TIANDORES files and the new story.
cles
0.0 migrated that the BFV might was have a copy.
Joke sand they would get it.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_50.jpeg ---
■14-00000
S-B÷C-R-E-T
REPORT ON. CONTACT VII. AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROCTE
DATE:
18 Appl 15963.
TDE:
1130
PLACE:
Kuhal
COMMENTS:
K
Case Officer
Crne K archa
to be in
CO tooz Subject to lunch and found
reasonably good good. CO told him that we were mak
slow but sure progress in solving the probles regarding
immigration. Subject said he would be patient but hopes that
something will Earge scor
ag his

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000
WIRDGUR
th
Cop and AFRF have been infine thi
processed through them for maligation
should the frog both cop and
had any knowledge that this ear
pat
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-L-T
SUBJECT:
on byar 175m CR DEFECTOR
WIROGUE
DATE:
21 April 1964
TDE:
1130 hours
PLACE:
Kaiserstr. and
Taunus Anlage
Case Officer
ORME K. DARONNAT.
COMMENTS
C 0 met Subject who had invited him to meet for lunch
They had a drink together and then went to a Chineese
restaurant
At first C. O. was afraid that Subject was getting ready
to ask a favor or present a problem but it turned out that
he merely wanted to visit with C.O. whom he considers to be
his only friend,
friend, at least in Frankfurt. He said that his work
with the Munich firm is going very well and is coming along
fine. He received his ::(( :( :st month's salary and expects to go
to Munich on the first part of May for consultations and
would then, around 30 May, move to Munich permanently. C. O.
told Subject that he would be leaving for the U.S. probably
the first week in June and Subject asked if they could have
dinner together at least one more time before he left.
:
Subject said he had signed the contract, details of which
he had previously given C.O., but was sorry that he had not
brought the contract with him and promised to show it to C.O.
the next time they met. Subject thanked C. O. for all the
help he had given him to enable him to make a new start and
wanted the lunch to be a small token of his appreciation. He
also paid C.O. 20 DM which had been loaned him a year and a half
earlier and gave C.O. a small French cigarette lighter as a
rememberance. C. O. dropped Subject off downtown and suggested
they have lunch, perhaps the first or second week in May.
SECRET
1.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_51.jpeg ---
14-00000-
Hemo for th
9 April
tagatung
Bill Murray
tion of
Chris said
INTERPOL beside
Interpol files
9 April 63
Chris called
18 hin the backgr
point up the need for CARAVEL's
as much as possible the workings
check out the two names against
that Interpol Hdqtrs in Paris
sends out a wanted list to every country in the world. This list
includes the names of 1. Those to be arrested. 2. Those whose: address
is desired. 3. Those to be checked on periodically by the local
authorities. Aperson appearing on the list stays on indefinitely.
The list is follved by fingerprints and a data card.
1630.
Chris called to inform us that CARAVEL had called to inform him
that Subject was not listed under the two names we had given him and
since he was not in the German Interpol files was not in the Interpol
files of any other country with the possible exception of Hdqtrs in
Paris. CAREVEL will be going to Paris in the near future and can
check the files since he has free accessi
16 aprel 63
Bull Mashed Chris B. to have Dean W. to make sure
that CARAVEL sticks at WIROGUES names with INTERAL
in Paris when he goes there in the next four weekso
9 May 63
Desi W. called to inform us that WIRSAVE
in the main INTERPinifiles in Paris.
that WIRDAVE is mal hitel

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_52.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
9 April 1963
TIME:
1200
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr.
Orme D Da
Crme K. Marchnat
Case Officer
COMMENTS
CO met Subject and found him to be in a blue funk. Subject
said that he was somewhat less then pleased with his German documentation
that as long as he stayed Germany and was under the protection of the
German Government he had nothing to worry about. He feels that as long
as the US Forces are here he has no problems but that as soon as we
leave Germany will probably take a long look at the number of refugees
here and take steps to encourage certain types to depart. Subject
said that he could end up in all kinds of trouble. CO told him that
in the first place the US Forces would be in Germany for a long time
at least during his lifetime. In the second place Subject would be long
gone before the Government changed it's attitude toward refugees.
Subject then said he was worried that when he got to S.A. the
Columbian Government would probably check with the Soviet Gov't to
find out if he was indeed an ex Soviet citizen. This would result in
his being put in prison for entering the country under false pratenses.
CO said there was no reason for the Columbian Government to check with
the Sovs. Subject would arrive a bone fide immigrant fully checked
out by the organization responsible for to the Columbian Bovt. CO
pointed out that the Columbian Govt would be crazy to alert the Sova
that one of their ex citizens was there with the possibility of having.
him recruited to work for the Sovs. Subject was still dubious but
stated that he would go anyway since that is what we wanted. CO
pointed out that he had request help in going to SA and that we had
found it necessary to get him a Reiseause to accomplish this. He
was told that it is too late now for him to have misgivings that what
is done is done and he would have to accept it.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_54.jpeg ---
Non 13th, 1963
A discussion held in Bad Godesberg on March 12th, 1963, between
Chief of ICEM Mission in Germany and Mr. J. Riley of AS
revealed the following procedure taken by 10 on refugee applicants
for migration to South America under the ICH Special Program:
1. Applicant, it a refugee, must be recognized under UN High
Commissioner's Mandate as a bona fide political refugee.
(ote: All refugees holding a Reiseausweis automatically
fall under the Mandate.)
2. A detailed curriculum vitae of the applicant must be sent
by AFRF to Mr. neegard. 1CEM emphasizes that all time be
accounted for since "gaps" are not accepted.
Applicant must supply documentary proof of profession or
skill. In lieu of such documents, a letter of
a letter of testimony
from a current employer describing joo skills and qualifi
cations or applicant will be considered.
4. ICEM will arrange to interview the applicant and to give tests
to determine applicant's qualifications. ICEM will not accept
tests which are made by other sources. The
and that co
his given in FF/M.
5. ICEM conducts its own security clearance on each applicant
whether USEP or non-USFP case.
6. If applicant is found acceptable by ICEM, a work contract
must be signed by the applicant prior to departure from Germany.
ICEM has a placement service, which arranges the job placement
and obtains the work contract. This is a standard ICEM procedure.
ICEM will not sponsor the applicant who does not sign a work
contract.
-
7. The total procedure requires at least three months from the date
the applicant's curriculum vitae is received by ICEM, Bad Godes-
berg.
8. ICFM does not accept payment of passage by applicants nor is
there an ICEM loan grant. ICEM charges DM 210.-- for men between '
18-51 for transportation including luggage. The charges for women's
6.
transportation amount to DN 163-- (10-51 years old), DM --
for children between 5 and 10 years old. Transportation of children
under five is free of charge. The total transportation cost per
family will not exceed DM 588.--.
ICEM Placement Service in South American countries, will meet the
migrant on arrival, introduce him to the employer, and ascertain
that all is in order. In the event that an applicant leaves this
work, ICFM placement service will assist him to find another job...
The placement service does not give assistance after the second
job is found.
DADAPT

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_53.jpeg ---
14-0,000
S-E÷C¬R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT ON REFECTUR
SUBJECT:
Sinogue
DATE:
29 March 1963.
TIME:
1200
PLACE:
Kubwaldstr.
Orme K. Darannet
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Comet
Orme K. Daronnat
Subject and paid him two weeks subsistance.
Subject asked about the status of his immigration processing and was
told that it was not coming along as well as CO would like but there was
nothing to done about it.
Subject is in no hurry to be out on his own seems to be
enjoying his stay with us. CO is worried that Subject might be difficul
to get rid of when the time comes to make his move.
CO promised to drop by sometime during the following week.
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_57.jpeg ---
140000
Memo for the record
WIROGUE
7 March '63.
Blake Cox called to inform Earvard that some of ICEM
cases have a security check run on them which would include a
check with Interpol. Blake will try to find which type of case is
checked and why
The investigation is handled by the Special Assistant to the
Director of ICE in Geneva.
Blake will also find out the name of the erson who conducts
the investigation and the office he is in. He will also check to
find out if #1 Gray is still there.
12 March '63
Blake called to inform us that R. H. Gray is now the PIO in
Geneva.
The
special assistant to the Director is Peter Regis. His.
assistant is Yarousch? (retiredArmy Major). Blake said USEP cases
are not checked as thoroughly as straight applicants to ICEM but he
still cannot find out what decides if a case will be checked with
Interpol.
...

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_56.jpeg ---
14-00000.
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
13 March 1963
TIM
1100
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr.
Orme
Daronnat
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
CO dropped in to see Subject and paid him two weeks subsistance
CO told Subject that there were two major hurdles to his immigration
to Columbia. 1. ICE would require that he be thoroughly interviewed
and tested to establish just what his technical qualifications are
It would, therefore, be necessary that we be careful to build his work
history around" which he not only could have been doing in the
Soviet Union, but in which he could pass a practical examination and
which the South American country needs and desires. Subject said that
if his legend included schooling in electro-mechanical fields with the
major portion of his work experience in development and improvement
of devices and processes he could in fact pass any test practical test
and subsequent interview.
2.
'
We must assume that he is listed with INTERFOL since
the French would almost automatically inform other European countries
of Subject's disappearance from France.
Subject agreed that this was
a major problem but one that he could not help with.
Subject has resigned himself to being processed as a
regular inmigrant and has said that he will do whatever we require.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000
.2.
10. “r. Heegard stressed that each applicant is processed thoroughly
to avoid sending an unqualified person to South America.
-
.
11. Basic Spanish, according to Fr. Heegard, can be learned by an
aplicant over a period of three months at least three hours
of
instruction per week. This should be done prior to departure
from Germany.
12. During the processing the applicant receives a camphlet explaining
the economic, social, political, etc. conditions of the country
of his choice.
13. Mr. Heegard said that, in general, promotional opportunities are
excellent in certain fields due to the lack of a qualified personnel
14. The Special Program is the only one under which ICE operates for
foreign refugees desiring to emigrate from Europe to South America
15. Professions and skills required in South America are: (COLUMBIA)
Electrical machine construction (biektromaschinenbau): engineer,
technician (draiting and operating), draftsman, master, cutting-tool
maker (Schneiowerkzeugmacher), matrix maker for plastic material.
Metallury: Skilled founary worker; moulder (metail foundry); rolling-
mill worker and technician, casting mould matrix maker (Metallguss-
form-Schablonenmacher).
Miscellaneous professions: Repair mechanic, photo-engraver, offset-
retoucher, technician for plastic material, papermaker.
16. Professions and skills not required in South America:
Lawyers, office worker, specialist for commerce and sale, construction
engineer, construction technician and construction worker, carpenter,
leather manufacturer, waiter, servant, unskilled laborer.
17. HOUSING - ICEM does not find housing for the migrant but
may give advice if needed!
18. ICEM BAD GODESBERG, coordinate with ICEM GENEVA
on the processing of an applicant.
19. S.A. job
or may be found at the RENTRAL STRALE
cor
FüR ARBEITSVERMITTLING, ESCHEESHEIMERLANDSTR. 1-7.
FF/M. (ICEM GENEVA perds the job late to the above
organization).
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_58.jpeg ---
14-00000
March 63
This date Don red and Bill A. discussed with Gu
and Jack R. of AFRP the content of our conversation with Earl Blake
Cox 27 Feb. Gus agreed with Blake's thinking and suggested that instead
A
of writing for immigration information, either he or Jack (would go
to ICEM and personally discuss the immigration questions with the
proper people.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_60.jpeg ---
100000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
15 February 1963
TIME:
1130
PLACE:
Kuhwald Strasse
One
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Case Officer worked with Subject discussing the vital
statistics which would have to acquired for and memorized by
.Subject in order to supply the refugee organization with
certain factual information necessary for his processing
This information would also be vital if in casual conversation
Subject was to keep from drawing suspicion to himself when
queried about his homeland, etc.
"th
C/O said that he would be able to acquire the information.
Subject would need. Subject asked if with his name could it
have been possible for his father to have come from one of the
Baltic countries. C/O promised to find out and inform him at
their next meeting.
28 February
1100
C/O dropped in to see Subject and informed him that he
would very likely be processed for South America through a
refugee organization. This would mean with a refugee organ-
ization behind him and USEP support he would not be subjected
to the investigation, interviews, etc he would normally undergo
if he went directly to ICEM.
C/O told Subject that arrangements would be made for him
to start studying Spanish as soon as practical.
Subject was told that his name was a common one throughout
the Baltic region and therefore, he would be able to discuss
that part of his legend with confidence.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: VIROGUE
DATE: 12 Feb., 63.
Ti
TDE:
1100
PLACE: Kuhwaldstr.
Irime
Case Officer
Crne K. Daronnat
be a
for
COMMENTS:
Subject told 60 that he had gone to the Columbian
Consulate at 10 am Hauptbahnhof and found it to be a one man,
ther, an one woman office. He said he found the representative to
leasant but rather incompetent German woman about 50 years of
He told her that he was a refugee and wished to inquire about
igrating to Columbia. She told him that as an engineer he would
have no difficulty being accepted but that he would have to contact
the Ministry in Columbia through ICEY which would make all the
arrangements, If everything worked out properly she would receive
notification to issue a visa.
CO explained that it would be impossible for Subject to
50 to ICE on his own. Subject was told that these developments
would indicate that Subject should be processed as a regular refugee.
with a Volunteer Agency Age and USEP support.
Co toba “ubject that he would advise qtrs of the new
developments and get permission to use the new approach to his
resettlement.
Subject was advised to work on his legend until CO would
by on Friday.
:
'
14

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
18 March 1964
TDE:
12 o'clock
PLACE:
Schultheis Restaurant
OKD
ORNE K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O. met Subject in response to a telephone call in
which Subject invited C. O. to lunch to help him celebrate
a new stroke of fortune WIROGUE told C., O. that the
director of the firm in Munich (reported in previous contact.
reports) and his European sales representative had met with
Subject and discussed the possibility of his association with
the Munich firm. Subject said the following had been agreed
on:
=
Subject would receive 1500 DM a month salary,
free living quarters in Munich, the cost of
maintaining his apartment in Frankfurt, expense
account, percentage of the profits realized
from any of Subject's inventions patented by the
firm, a work shop in Munich plus absolute personal
freedom of movement regarding working hours, etc.
etc.
C. O. told him that the above was very hard to believe,
that he should have this in writing. Subject said that it
was to be drawn-up and sent to him for his signature.
11
C. O., of course, expressed his delight with Subject's
perspicacity and perspicuity and 101st but not that boundless
ga all. C. O. asked if this would mean he would be moving to
the Munich area Subject said that this was doubtful unless.
he could find a mechanic in the Munich area who would work
as cheaply as Nagely with whom he is now associated. He
intends to spend most of his time in Munich, however, and
will come to Frankfurt once a month to oversee Nagely's work
on the production models of his projects. Subject intends to
do the research and development work in Munich with Nagely in
Frankfurt making the finished model.
E
wigning its
RECTASSE
!

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_59.jpeg ---
4-00000
.
Nemo for the record WIROGUE
27 Feb. 163
On this date Bill M. and Don Mch. discussed the Airogue cas
ith Earl Blake Cox (Chief, RMS
RMS, ANCONGEN Munich).
Blake
told that we have a case which we wish to help immigrate
to South America. Blake was told that we had hoped to send Subject.
directly to ICE (Subject cannot immigrate directly to South America
but must have all arrangements handled through I CEM) cut that in
exploratory talks with Gus Elmendorf (Chief, APRP) Gus had been of the
opinion that our case would be thoroughly investigated, interviewed,
tested, etc.; procedures which we wished to avoid since they might
bring to light the fact that our case was not the person he claimed
to be
Blake agreed that Gus was correct in his thinking that if Subject
went to ICE on his own he would be interviewed and trade tested for
higher
a special program set up by ICEM to supply SA with certa Sted for
types of skilled specialists, e.g. f foremen, shop managers,
etc.
:
:
Blake suggested that we make our case USEP sligible through AFRF
and then refer him to ICEM. This procedure would probably give Subject
more status in ICEM's eyes and eliminate some of the background
investigation. Subject would also be referred as a self-payer meaning
he would have the funds to pay his own transportation.
Blake asked if Subject would have a job waiting for him and was told
that he would have no job but would have a letter attesting to the
fact that there was $3,000.00 being held for him insalary and bonuses
which he had peeived while working for the Army. Blake the this
this
arrangement would be satisfactory.
Blake feels that coming to ICEM as a USEP case through APRP
Subject would probably be accepted without question since he would
have been thoroughly checked out by Camp King and AFRF thus eliminating
the need for investigatory action by ICEM.
-
Blake was on his way to Bad Godesberg and said he would try
to find out without arousing suspicion whether or not a refugee is
fingerprinted and with what authorities the fingerprints are checked.
He would also find out if a security investigation is made and now
(over)
b.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
All
A
:
Nemo for the record
WIROGUE
European
asked Chief, CANANTILLA why a refugee who
applied for immigration to a South American Country would be referred
11 Feb. '63 the undersigned asked Chief, CA
that Consulate to ICEM.
handles the
gration processing for
The answer was that I
refugees in Europe going to countries overseas. This saves the individual
country the expense entailed in maintaining inzigration and welfare
Offices and staffs. If a ref-gee goes to ICEM on his own he would
probably be referred to a are Agency or ce processed by ICE itself
This would mean forms to be d out in detail and time consuming
background checks.
If the Refugee is a Cazantilla USEP case most of the work would.
have been done by CAXANTILLA and would probably eliminate the need
for the refugee to appear at I CEM in Bad Godesburg until the final
stages of the processing.
Ome K. Daroanat
Varenna

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_63.jpeg ---
1
00
11 February 1963
OC-5517
An
Das burdesamt fuer Verfassungsschutz
zu Han des Herrn Dr.Meler
Kolr
BETRIFFT:
BEZUGI
Georg SANDERS, geb. 25.7.1919 in Tiflis, USSR
Dart. Schreiben vom 14 Dezember 1962 - IV A 4-112-P-50580-2/62
Subject is of continuing operational interest to AIS: Accordingly, it would
be appreciated if your investigation were suspended. Should our operational
interest be terminated at any time while Subject remains in the German Federal
Republic, we will automatically furnish you with the details of this case.
C. W. Schmitz
OCA Liaison Officer
GEHEIM!

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_66.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
V-Vertraulich
SANDERS weigerte sich, nähere Angaben über seine
Plucht nach Berlin-West zu machen. Angeblich ist ihm
auch unbekannt, auf welche Weise ihn seine Freunde
in die Feisegruppe einzuschleusen vermochten.
Für eine Mitteilung aller dort über SANDERS vorliegenden
Erkenntnisse und die Überlassung einer möglicherweise
vorliegenden Befragungsniederschrift wären wir dankbar
Im Auftrag
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_68.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPOP CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEPECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE:
Feb. 1963
TDE: 1130
PLACE: Kuhwaldstr.
Onne B. Damal
Gime
Urme K. Daronnut
Case Officer
COMMENTS: CO dropped by to see Subject and informed him that
we had been informed that if Subject was still interested and could
swing an immigration visa to South america we had authorit
pay his way to SA and provide monetary support up to 125.00 per
month until he is able to establish himself. Subject was quite surprised
to
and pleased and wanted to know long he would receive the monthly
payment. CC told him that this had been left up to CO's discretion
who assureddSubject that as long as he diligently applied
himself to finding work and was not too choosy he would continue to
to receive financial support.
CO and Subject agreed that Columbia seems to be the best
choice. CO. told Subject to go to the Columbian Consulate, An Hauptbahnhof
10 and get as mich information as possible regarding immigration.
Ee will attempt to find out if his processing can be done herein
FF/M or if it will be necessary to go to Hamburg.
Subject was told that after he gets to SA, CO will maintain
contact through the mail or someone in SA will maintain contact
with him by letter drop.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_65.jpeg ---
14-00000
Gesch.-Z::
BUNDESAMT For verfassuNGSSCHUTZ
IV A 4 - 112-P-50580- 2/62
VS-Vertr.
Durch Kurier
American Embassy, OCA
2.H. Mr. C.W. SCHLITZ
Room III 407
Kehlem
VS-Vertraulich
5 Köln 1, con 14 Dezember 1962
Postlach
25083
Betr.: Georg SANDERS, geb. 25.7.1919 in Tiflis/UdSSR,
8.Zt. wohnhaft in Oberursel/Ts.,
Hobemarkstr.145
Bezugi Ohne
SANDERS befindet sich seit dem 14.7.1962 in Obhut oiner.
US-Dienststelle in Oberursel, nachdem er angeblich am
gleichen Tage als sowj. Tourist von Ost- nach Westberlin
geflichtet war. Am 28.8.1962 stellte er Antrag auf An-
erkennung als ausländischer Plüchtling. Am 29.8.1962
wurde er in Anwesenheit eines Angehörigen einer US-
Dienststelle durch die Kriminalpolizei vernommen. Bei
der Vernehmung machte SANDERS undurchsichtige Angaben
über seine Flucht.
SANDERS führte u.a. an, in der UdSGR einer Widerstands-
gruppe als führendes Mitglied ungehört zu haben. Einer
beabsichtigten Pestnahme will er sich dadurch tzogen
huben, in dem er sich vor. Preunden in eine sow]. Touristem
gruppe einschleusen ließ, mit der er zu einer Besichti
Gungefahrt in die SBZ am lo.7.1962 aua Tiflis abgereist
und am 14.7.1962 in Ootberlin eingetroffen sei. Er
flüchtete angeblich unmittelbar nach seiner Ankut in
Ostberlin.
2

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_67.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
S-B-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIRUGUE
DATE: 8 Feb. 1963
TDE:
1505
PLACE:
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Subject calling Kany that he had gone to the Columbian
Consulate which was closed. He had
with comes
in the consulate and had learned that
everything regarding excegnation could be done in FF/1.
Subject will returns to the Consulates on the 11th
and expects to see C.O. on the 12th.
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_69.jpeg ---
14-00000
Memo to the File
SIROGUE
On 5 Feb 63 CO went to Born to talk with OCA re the FIROGUE case
and the SPV request for information on him.
were
CO discussed the case with KUBARK St fer Clarence Schmidt (true
name) and explained that it is true that a Georg Sanders
processed through Camp King for his political recognition, but
that his name, story submitted for his recognition, etc
complete fabrications concocted by Camping to ensure that
IROGUE rece ves his political recognition and Reiseausweis
Moroever since it it is a fabrication that means that there are
no reports of ery Kini y
it was explained by CO that since Sub is an agent (or rather was
1 which can be passed to the B.V. Finall
and not a normal defector he of course did not to through Stage 1
and 2 processing at Cabezone and therefore there are ro routine
was)
reports here that could be cessed to the 3 V.
Schmidt answerea that the reason the BV made an inquiry is that
because subjs atutement for his recognition indicated that he
defeated from the Soviet Union and read like a report of someone
who was being debriefed by Cabezone. Moreover the story submitted
for his reco,nition seemed so weak that it immediately drew the
atcntion of the Bfv
the security of West Germany.
the German organization responsible for
Mr. Schmidt then went into a long explanation of the function of
CCA and its relationship to the rest of the Intelligence (US)
Community and the BfV. He stated that as the sold coordinating
body for the entire IAIS community OCA is the sole office for
liaising with the 3fV and that any matter of interest of any
component of the AIS Community must be handled by OCA, whether it
be written or oral. It is therefore shown in the present case
that since the Bf requested info on a Georg Sanders it sent the
that
request to OCA with the realization that CA wold coordinate
the matter with all the AIS components and moreover the answer
passed to V would not be KUBARK one (even though the BfV
liaison people know OCA is primarily KUBARK) but a coordinated
AIS onc. It is for the above reason that QCA is very disturbed
by the activity of Mr John Willms of Camp King who throughout the
years has repeatedly refused to clear with 00*
business he had with the Bf directly with the BPV and usually
und handled any
with the Chief of the BfV.
brought up the RV inquiry on Senders with Willms, Willms mentioned
CO hed explained that even before he
that he had already made an appointment to talk with the
Chief of the BV and thus would take up the matter as a service to
Schmidt answered that willms uses there ruses is excuses to
us.
So sonn and butter up the Chief of the 36V.
to
.
In any event Schmidt stated that since he received the inquiry
from the B7 he is obligated to answer it and in order to keep"
:
,

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_64.jpeg ---
4
14-00000
Translation of German report from the BFV to the
American Embassy, OCA, z.H. Mr. C. W. SCHMITZ in Mehlem.
Concerning Georg SANDERS, gebxx95x born 25 July 1919
in Tiflis/USSR. Present residence in Oberursel/Ts
Hohemarkstr. 145.
Cross reference, none
As of the 14th July 1962 SANDERS is in the custody
of an U.S organization in Oberursel. It was alleged
that he had arrived on the same date as a tourist from
East- to West Berlin and defected there.
On the 28th of August 1962 he filed application for
recognition as a foreign refugee.
On 29 August 62 he was interviewed, in the presence
of a member of a U.S. organization, by the criminal
investigation. During the interview SANDERS, made
untransparent statements concerning his defection.
Among other SANDERS said that he had been a leading
member of a resistance group in the Soviet Union. More-
over he claimed that he evaded arrests by joining a
Soviet tourist group with the assistance of friends.
The tourist group went on a guided tour of the
Soviet occupied East zone of Germany: The group left
Tiflis on the 10th of July 1962 arriving in East Berlin
on the 14th of July 1962. Subject claimed that upon
arrival to East Berlin he escaped immediately. However,
SANDERS refused to make more detailed statements about
his escape to West Berlin. Allegedly it was unknown to
him how his friends had managed to place him into the
tourist group.
We would be grateful if any communications or
information concerning SANDERS inclusive a possible
interview report would be forwarded to us.
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_70.jpeg ---
14:00000
the B out of the case will inform it that Qub is of
continuing operational interest to AIS.
send him a cable stating that sub is of ons interest and
He regnested that
that it is conte plated that he will be resettled outside of
Germany This cable was sent to Bonn or 6 Feb 1953.
CO. upon retury from Bonn, reported the above with Mr Iyack,
Chief, Cabezone, who stated that though there is an agreement
between the services and OCA, the Generel in Heidelberg back
Mr films in
in his personal relations with the German services
and
thus this battle which has been coing on for years will
probably continue for several more years. In any event if
the matter of Willms versus OCA comes up again it is strongly
urged that Chief, Cabezone be cueried as soon as possible.
savid R. Revebald
david r reinhold
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_72.jpeg ---
I
certificate
14-00000'
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
SECRET
29 January 1963
On this date George List and the undersigned discussed
CO's plans and thinking regarding WIROGUE's immigration to
South America. Case Officer explained that since Subject is
an exceptional case and not a bona fide refugee, we will not
be able to take advantage of the normal immigration channels
without taking the chance of being involved in fraud. Case
Officer further explained that since WIROGUE's contact with
the Consulate of his choice will not in any way be controlled
by us, this immigration attempt will be a one shot operation
and if it fails, we will not have a second chance because if
he is turned down for immigration, any subsequent attempts he
makes to immigrate will bring to light the fact that he had
previously applied for immigration to another country.
essential therefore that we plan for every contingency.
Officer feels, based on HARVARD's experience, that when WIROGUE
applies for immigration he will be required to give
It is
Case
(1) the name and address of his present employer and
probably the name of his supervisor and telephone number.
(2) what type of work he has been doing;
(3) proof that he will be able to support himself for
a minimum of two years at the rate of $125 a month.
(4) proof of his professional qualifications.
(5)
birth certificate.
(6) detailed information regarding his employment and
residence addresses in the Georgian SSR
(7) details of the war-time military service.
police good
M
www.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_74.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
3
reason to believe that you are not sincerely trying to establish
yourself.
Case Officer will tell him, ban
that:
it were necessary.
could count upon a year's support, if
ORME K. DARONNAT

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_71.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: TIROGUE
DATE:
31 Jan. 1963
TIME: 1100
PLACE: Kuhwaldstr.
Game
Dava
Orme K. Daronnat
Case Officer
COMMENTS: CO dropped in to see Subject and found him busy with one
of his inventions. He was paid subsistance and given cigarettes and
Subject was told that there was no news regarding his
coffee.
immigration.
CO promised to drop by on Thursday the 7th
CO promised
F
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_75.jpeg ---
14-0000
LAKEFR
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
DATE:
TIME:
PLACE:
WIROGUE
16 January 1963
1100
K
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
2.
Case Officer dropped by to see Subject and paid him
subsistence.
Subject's morale is high but he would like to get some
word soon on what is to be done with him He was told that
we had quired headquarters and asked them to advise as soon
as possible and that there was nothing more we could do for
the present
SECRÉT
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_73.jpeg ---
4-00000
SECRET
Case Officer said that early next week he will meet with
Wagner and Willms of the 513th and explain the above. If it
is possible he will get them to agree to provide the details
of (1) above in the event the Consulate should call as part
of the routine immigration processing. (2) above will be taken
care of in the same manner Regarding (3), Headquarters has
given us authority to expend up to $3,000 and Case Officer will
se 513th of this They will be asked to provide a letter
if required, stating that Subject has been associated with
them (whatever cover organization they wish to use) since his
defection in July 62 and has roughly $3,000 in salary and bonuses
being held for him. Regarding (4) whether or not is is adviseable
to provide Subject with proof of his professional qualifications
will be discussed with the 513th. (5) above, a birth certificate
will probably not be necessary since so many defectors do not
Information on employment and
residences will be worked up by the Case Officer from past.
defector's BARS and with material available to SR 6. (6) above
this information may also be acquired through facilities of SR 6.
After discussions with the 513th, Case Officer will tell
WIROGUE that we have been informed by Headquarters that if
Subject still desires to immigrate to South America and is
successful in immigrating, we have authority to provide financial
assistance during the transistion period up to $125 a month.
Since Case Officer knows WIROGUE the next question will be,
have these documents with them
How long will I receive this $125 a month?" Case Officer will
reply," Until you become satisfactorily established or we have
-
."
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_7.jpeg ---
O told Subject that he should not forget he would
be required to establish a Zueiter Wohngits Subject said
would look into this as soon as the work shop in Munich
was completed and ready for him
Subject stated that C. O. was his only friend and that
he would like to call him again soon and have lunch with
him. C. O. told him he would be delighted to meet him
whenever he has time
O dropped Subject off downtown
after congratulating him once again on his good fortune
NOTE C. O. is aware that Subject is basically a lonely
man and does enjoy his company
his company. He is also aware that
Subject is staying in frequent touch because he feels he
is operating in a society to which he really, does not belong
and associates himself more with things American
TG
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_76.jpeg ---
-00000
Bob:
TB-SANDERS, Goy
trace: of 508A-25083, 16 Jun 53,
NEGATIVE. John sent copies
dispatch to DRC and CAT.
Attached is a copy of BARVARD's ply which states BARK interes
i
Potential is traced" due to no carding although Subject has boon
known to ban since August 25, 1962.
result
This failure
to
to card alias of WiROUGE. Hps. will
now card Sanders as t
though
pounding folly. Obviously.
true
somloue
com.
meme, further
forget to card alias
WIROUGE & records should be corrected.
91.Q.
of

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_77.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
S-B-C-R-E-
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
10 January 1963
TDE:
1130
PLACE:
51 Kuhwaldstr.
Orme
ORME K. DARONNAT
COMMENTS:
Dasinmal
Case Officer
Case Officer picked up Subject, took him
took him downtown and
had lunch, with him. Subject is in good spirits but would
still like to receive word one way or the other of what
will happen to him in the future Case Officer told him
that we had sent out a cable requesting an answer to our
proposals.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_79.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-B-C-B-
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENTS OF DIPSOBER
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE.
DATE:
3. January 1963
TIME:
1515
PLACE:
Kuhwaldstr. 55
Dan
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Offider
COMMENTS:
--
He
have
Case Officer dropped by to see Subject and pay him
subsistence to 19 January
and does not seem as restless as he usually is
Subject is in good spirits
confided to. Case Officer that he is hoping he won
to do any running around regarding his immigration as
long as the weather stays as bad as it is. He seems
be reasonably satisfied with his lot in life and only
to
asked that the Case Officer drop by a little more often
if possible because he gets lonely.
S-E-C-R-E-T

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
11 March 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
On 25 February 1964 the undersigned met with Clarence
Schmidt and Art Stimpson of CCA Bonn to apprise them of the
status of the WIROGUE case. Since Clarence S. was preparing
to depart PCS, C.O.'s discussion was primarily with Art S.
Clarence's replacement.
lacement.
C. O. briefed Art on WIROGUE's background prior to
recruitment and his activities while associated with KUBARK,
C. O reviewed HARVARD's attempt to prepare Subject for
resettlement and said that we are now in a position to quit
claim him and close the case and that we wanted to bring OCA
up-to-date on the status of Subject's case and to find out if
there are any loose ends from Bonn's point of view or HARVARD's
which should be tightened up prior to cutting Subject loose.
C. O. explained that since December 12, 1962 when OCA
received a query from the BFV regarding Subject, HARVARD had
been trying to reach the point where Subject could be on his
own: C. O. explained that we had realized that after the
original political recognition interview fiasco had brought
Subject to the attention of the BFV, that to enable Subject to
emigrate from Germany or to stay here without continuing
problems in the future would require preparing a complete life
history for Subject with a new political recognition interview
story. Both the Lebenslauf and a new interview story were
prepared and copies of the old story were removed from the
various files and replaced by the new. C. O. said that HARVARD
had two questions for Bonn and that (1) at the time of the
original BFY interest in Subject had OCA promised Subject L
be-resettled outside Germany? and (2) would OCA know if the
BFV in Cologne had a copy of Subject's political recognition-
interview story?. Art brought out OCA's file on the case and
said to answer the second question first it would appear from
the detailed information contained in the BFV query that they.
-
T
Excited.
;

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_78.jpeg ---
140000
I
SECRET
9 January 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
Case Officer received a letter from Chuck Pettit, addressed
to WIROGUE (George Sanders), Hohemarkstr. 145. Case Officer
opened the letter and found it to be from a Lt. Zircle of the
Transportation Corps. The Lt. mentioned that
The Lt. mentioned that he and his friend
had enjoyed their conversation with Subject at the Bahnhof
short time ago and had found him very interesting
said he received a great deal of pleasure from meeting people
The Lt:
such as Subject with such interesting backgrounds.
He suggested that he and Subject meet for dinner in the
near future
Case Officer took th
little bit about Subject's past and suggested that something
letter to Bob Bullock, told him a
be done to prevent the Lt. from continuing his friendship with
Subject, since Case Officer felt that WIROGUE would probably
use the Lt. 'for whatever he could get out of him. Bullock
said he would have CID contact the Lt. and tell him to lay off
for his own good. Bullock promised to find out if the Lt.
had given Subject his address and to advise him that if he
should run into Subject, he should not mention having written
a letter.
One
0
ORME K. DARONNAT
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_81.jpeg ---
+00000
'
AM
53-20
U. S. Army Trans Center
Lt. William D. Zirkle
rankfurt
a. Main
Elbe Str. #52:
Patemotion
fic
-3·1.03-201
GAD
Mesmer
7-21.2 1961
6.
Firmational
Ficekic
JUU Messe
17-21.2.1983
Herrn,.
Georg Sanders
Frankfurt a. Main Oberursel
BUNDGA
EF
fur
17.-21
205
HoenmarkStr #145

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_80.jpeg ---
1400000
...
#52 e Strasse
Fe
Frankfurt a. Main
3 January 1963
Georg Samdera
bermark Str.
Oberursel
Frankfurt a. Main
Dear Mr. Sanders
Just wanted to drop ou this line to tell you again how much I
enjoved our conversation the other evening at the Bahnhof. My greatest
experiences in Germany are the different people I meet, and it is always
very pleasant to talk with someone such as yourself who has such an
interesting background.
My friend felt rather silly at his attempted joke. The next time
he either will have less to drink or will think more before clowning!
It would be a pleasure to see you again during my tour of duty
in Frankfurt. Maybe if you have a free hour or so in the future you
would want to have another supper in the Bahnhof!
CIRCULATE
Sincerely,
William D.
William D. Zirkle
MEMO ROUTING SLIP
NAME ON TITLE
NEVER USE FOR APPROVALS, DISAPPROVALS,
CONCURRENCES, GR SIMILAR ACTIONS
Dy RC (Murray)
ORGANIZATION AND LOCATION
WIROGUT
INITIALS
DATE
COORDINATION
2/Lt, TC
FILE
INFORMATION
NECESSARY
ACTION
NOTE AND
RETURN
SEE ME
SIGNATURE
•Bill. We have handled
this with St. Zinkle with
no trouble at all
DD
TIPUL
"
Bab Bullock

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_82.jpeg ---
14-00000
S+B+C-R-S-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATES 19 December 1962
TDE: 1030
PLACE: 51 Kuhwaldstr.
ORNE K DARONNAT Case Office
COMMENTS
Case Officer dropped in to deliver some Christmas cheer
to Subject and gave him his Reiseausweis and Anmeldebestatigung
His HARVARD identity document was picked up
Subject told Case Officer he had the feeling that Head-
quarters would advise us to turn him loose without any additional
help from us and he was worrying because it would be difficult
for him to get a job and apartment on very short notice. Case
Officer told him that we are aware of this and that if it is
recommended that he be resettled on the economy we are not in
the habit of throwing people out in the street and that we would
do everything we could to help him become integrated.
Subject was paid subsistence for two weeks.
promised to try to drop by the end of next week.
Case Officer
From time to time Subject tries to find out if Case Officer
knows the details concerning Subject's past work for us and the
reasons for our insistance that he was blown in the Congo. (A.
fact which he does not believe and therefore feels that the
relationship was discontinued for other reasons.) Case Officer
told Subject that he did not know and did not wish to know the
details since in our job we are only told what is necessary
for us to resettle the people for whom we are responsible.
SECRET
1.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_84.jpeg ---
14-00000
:;
CL
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITHE AGENT ORATOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
21 November 1962
TIME:
1000
PLACE:
51 Kühwaldstr
ORME K. DARONNAT Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Dale informed Case Officer that he had taken clothing
to Subject and had paid him subsistence as Case Officer had
requested. He said that he had promised Subject that one.
of us would be by around the same time. He informed Subject
that he could buy a scarf, a hat and a pair of shoes and we
would pick up the tab,
pick up the tab.
Subject seems to be in good spirits but is eager.to be
on his way to South America or somewhere
SECRET.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_85.jpeg ---
14-00000
3-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE:
16 November 1962
TDE:
1230
PLACE: 51 Kuhwaldstr.
ORME K." DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Case Officer picked up Subject and took him downtown,
bought him lunch and then bought him several items of clothing
which he badly needed. Subject was greatly pleased d
'T
21
although he cannot understand why we are doing so much for him
Case Officer explained that he is receiving nothing more than
any other case that we are asked to help Case Officer said
that we were told originally by Headquarters to help Subject
in any way that we reasonably could and that we with the cooperation
of Headquarters are doing just that. Case Officer said that as far
as he knows now, Subject will be helped to immigrate to South
America and that we hope to send a dispatch to Headquarters
explaining Subject's case as it now stands and we hope to receive
soonest Headquarter's advice as to the future course of action
we will take regarding Subject. Case Officer said that he hopes
to be in a position within a week or two to advise Subject as to
what we can and hope to do for him.
Case Officer said that
help Subject to immi hat in the final analysis if we do not
and he is turned loose on the economy,
we would not throw him into the street, that he would be given
a period of time in which to find a job and an apartment and that
it is usually our procedure to help financially, at least the first
month's rent and an additional subsistence payment until he receives
his first paycheck. Subject was greatly relieved to hear this.
S-E-C-R-E-T

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_83.jpeg ---
1400000
S-E-C-R-E÷T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
WIROGUE
SUBJECT:
DATE:
28 November 1962
TIME:
1000
PLACE:
51 Kuhwaldstr.
Ki Naronnat
ORME KADARONNATE Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Case Officer dropped by to see Subject, who seems to be
in good spirits and busy making preparations to make appli⁄
cation for a patent on one of his brain-storms.
Subject was told that the details of his case had been
submitted to Headquarters, that we were now prepared to move
based on Headquarter's advise Subject was told that we can
only wait for the answer from Headquarters.
Subject has requested a German typewriter which will be
delivered to him some time this week.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_87.jpeg ---
at
S-E-C-R-E÷T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR:
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE: 9. November 1962
TDE:
1100
PLACE:
Ostendstr. 1, Apt. 9
ORME KDARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
Case Officer dropped by to tell Subject that security advised us
to move him before 1700 today Case Officer told him he would be by
after 1330 to pick him up
Case Officer picked up Subject at 1400 and moved him to 51 Kuhwaldstr,
top floor. Subject asked if he could unpack and spread out. Case Officer
informed him that this apartment would also be given up, but he did not
known when. He advised Subject not to spread out too far.
S-E-C-R-E-T
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_86.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
*>3¬E˜C÷R¬E÷T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: "WIROGUE
14 November 1962
1100
51 Kunwaldstr
COMMENTS:
ORMS DARONNAT
Case Officer
Case Officer dropped in to see Subject and pay him weekly subsistence.
Subject was extremely nervous and very upset. he said that the apar
apartment
is so quite that it is impossible for him to do any work on his inventions
There is no gas stove so that he can solder; no telephone and the only
clothes hat he has are summer clothes which he was wearing when he came
to us from the Congo
Case Officer told him that we would try to get something out this
week and hoped to receive some indication from headquarters as to our
next step. Subject begged Case Officer to come by as often as possible
so he would have someone to talk to. Case Officer rpomised to try to
return on Friday, 16 November.
S-E-C-R-E-T

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_89.jpeg ---
14-00000
M
r
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE:
16 October 1962
TDE:
1000
PLACE:
Ostendstr. 1, Apt. 9.
192
ORME
K. DARONNAT
COMMENTS:
Case Officer
Case Officer dropped in and paid Subject one-weeks subsistence.
He is still buzy with his invention and is firmly convinced that
he will make a million dollars. Subject seems perfectly content to
stay in our custody and has not mentioned his proposed immigration to
South America. It is obvious that he wants to finish his invention
and try to sell it. If he is unsuccessful, Case Officer feels that
he will probably want to immigrate immediately.
1
SECRET
"
1

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_90.jpeg ---
14-00000.
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT OR CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTON
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE
10 October 1962
TIME:
1030
PLACE:
Ostendstr
Apt
9
Orment Donat
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer.
COMMENTS:
-He
Case Officer dropped in and paid Subject 150 DM subsistence.
was told that we had finally received his Reiseausweis which means that
for the first time in many years, he has legal documentation
is now clear for him to immigrate to South America.
The way
clear for him to immigrate to
He was told that Case Officer will send a cable to Headquarters,
informing them as to the status of Subject's documentation and propose
that steps be taken to begin Subject's processing for South America
Case Officer said that he had several ideas as to how this should be
done but in the final analysis would have to defer to Headquarters decision.
Subject asked if that meant he would be leaving soon.
Case Officer
told him it was his opinion that he would still be here in December.
Subject seems extremely content and satisfied at
with the status quo.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_88.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
S-E÷C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
25 October 1962
TIME:
PLACE: Ostendstr. 1 Apt. 9
Onnek
k Q
ORME K DARONNAT
Case Officer
rs
COMMENTS:
Case Officer dropped by to see Subject and pay him subsistence for
the week. He was advised that our legal department would possibly
recommend a patent attorney if and when he needed one. He replied that
he already had had an attorney recommended to him by a contact he had
made during the course of developing his invention
his invention. Case Officer asked
3.
him for the names of the contacts which he had made and he gave Case
Officer the following information.
He said he has made the acquaintance of a salesman representative
for several factories specializing in small electrical devices. The mans.
name is Wilhelm Salzmann, whose address is. Frankfurt/Main, am Mergarten 52,
telephone 492251. Subject said that this person had recommended a patent
attorney by the name of Wilhelm Reichel, a Dr. Ing. Patentanwalt, Frankfurt/Main,
Parkstr. 13, telephone 559165.
Subject told Case Officer that if he is lucky and his invention is
successful prior to any definite arrangements we make for his immigration
to South America, he will leave our custody and probably stay right here
in Frankfurt. He said that he is aware he has commited himself to go to
South America and will do so but all that he wishes to do if immediate
success of his invention is not forthcoming, is to get a patent on his
invention so he can negotiate at a later date from South America.
Case Officer feels that this is about the best we can expect from
Subject. Case Officer has discussed this situation regarding the patent
with John Morrison of the legal staff, who says that he will at least try
to find out if this patent attorney is qualified and successful.
NOTE: Case Officer has learned that the patent laws in Germany are somewhat
peculiar in that a patent attorney is a technical qualified man who can
obtain patents on subjects in which he has specialized and for which he
has received a specialized education but he is not an attorney in the sense
that he can deal with any legal questions which arise in the course of
patent procedures or litigation in patent matters. Normally, an individual
who intends to get a patent will hire an attorney who will contact a patent
attorney. Between the two of them they can handle all problems and procedures
involving a patent. This also can be worked in reverse.
-

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_93.jpeg ---
4-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T.
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
„WIROGUE
DATE:
13 Sept. 1962
TDE:
1030
PLACE:
Dame
Ostendstr.
Apt
Crne K. Daronnat
Case Officer
COMMENTS
CO dropped in to see Subject and found him all hopped
up about his latest invention. He preferred not to discuss it
with CO but says that he is so sure that it is a money maker that
he intends to apply for a German patent as soon as he works out
all the details. CO told him that he should hold off as long as
possible but in any event he should remember that his name is
Georg Sanders and that any business he conducts should be done
using his Hohemarkstr. address. 145.
CO may be wrong but he feels that Subject is agreeing
to immigrate to S.A. only in the hope that we will provide him with
a stake of some kind.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_92.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
TIROGUE
DATE:
17 September 1962
TIME:
1600
PLACE: Cstende
lrapt.9
E. Daronnat
COMMENTS:
Da
Case Officer
CO dropped in to see Subject and pay him subsistance
He is very enthusiastic about his inventions and since he is
occupied is reasonably happy. co topib/ip promised to drop
in later in the week.
21 September 1962.
CO
CO dropped in to see Subject to tell him that we were now
reasonably certain that he would receive political recognition and his
Reiseausweis. He was told that we are making good progress acquiring
the information necessary for immigration and that soon he could
start his processing. Subject is so wrapped up in his inventions.
that he seemed hardly to hear what CO was saying. CO at him down
and went over the events leading up to the present; that he had come to
us for a job and when that had not been forthcoming had stated that
his ambition was to be legalized and get citizenship by immigrating
to a SA country. He was reminded that that is what we are striving
to do but that we at this point are not sure how the immigration
will take place. He was told that dqtrs may require that he immigrate
on his' can with us supplying the plane ticket and nothing more or
he may possibly be helped by a refugee organization. Co said he did
not know if or what kind of financial assistance would be given him.
Subject said that he is grateful and wants to do whatever we desire
(over)
ädqtra
.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_91.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-5-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
Tele
4.92813
DATE:
3 October 1962
TIME:
1100
PLACE
Ostendstr. 1 Apt 9
ORMS K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
CO dropped by to see Subject and paid him his weekly subsistence
subsistence. Subject
is happily engrossed in his latest invention and no longer seems impatient
to leave HARVARD hands. Case Officer told Subject that we had received
his Beschluss which indicates that the German authorities will issue him
a Reiseausweiss. He was told that next week Case Officer will notify
Headquarters that his documentation has been received based on his story
that he is a recent refugee. We will further advise them that unless
they have objections, we will start his processing for South America
possibly with the sponsorship of one of the refugge organizations
7.
Subject agreed to this approach although Case Officer believes that
he is hoping he will succeed in making himself financially independent
by selling
one of his inventions. If this should happen, Case Officer
is sure that Subject will ask for his documentation and leave HARVARD
housing and go on his own.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_9.jpeg ---
kl.
on
were indeed in possession of a copy of the story. He went or
to state that in answer to question (1) OCA's reply to the
BFV was that Subject was of operational interest to AIS and
would they please suspend their investigation until Subject
is no longer of interest at which time OCA would automatically
provide the BFV with the details of Subject's case
C. O said that John Wilms of the 513 th MI Group at
Camp King was reasonably certain that the BFV man in Zirndorf
had only sent excerpts of the Sanders political recognition
interview story to the BFV in Cologne, since so many cases of
interest to the BFV are processed each month that only the
bare outlines of a particular case would be sent on from
Zirndorf Art and A1 W said that if the original story had
not gone to Cologne then a very detailed Summary had gone
In any event
We all agreed that unless Subject got into serious
trouble in the future no problems would arise
we could only wait and see what might come up
OCA appreciated being brought
being brought up-to-date on the case
and provided HARVARD CO with copies of the BFV 's original
query and OCA's reply. C. O. promised to send OCA a copy
of Subject's original and of his latest political recognition
interview story and a copy of the Lebenslauf.
ORME K DARONNAT

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_94.jpeg ---
14-00000.
S-E-C-R-E-T
WIROGUE
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR.
SUBJECT:
DATE:
5. September 1962
TIME:
1100
PLACE:
Cstendstr. 1; Apt
9.
Crae
4. Daronnat
Omek
Danomial
Case Officer
COMMENTS
CO Cropped by to see Subject and found him working
on his latest invention. He has given up working on the device
originally proposed by CO since he does not have sufficient
tools and because some ft) of parts #fé must be ordered
CO encourages him as long as it keeps him busy
from the US. CO encourages
and helps to pass the time
Subject has an extremely inventive mind and has
They would appear to
explained several of his ideas to CC.
have commercial value. Unfortunate) Sugject has neither the
money to develop them nor is he in a position to get involved
with patents or manufacturers at the present time.
+
He seems reasonably happy with his present status
but CO anticipates, a hairy situation if upon applying for
immigration to a SA country, the processing period takes a long
time.
Subject finds theod

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_95.jpeg ---
14-00000
Kezo for
the Record
20 August 1962
CC and Al Phe
oitu, and to i
reirogue's resettle=e-t
Gen. Lito discuss the Virogue
was being done or planned
A reviewed the e situation as it now stood and explained that
Edqrtre proposal t
t
was completely unsa te issued a backstopped Fremdenpass
tory since it would not stand up under
vestigation. It was exp Lined that
informed of only the necessary detalls
anything but the st casual
Carp King had been fra
of mirogues problem and had agreed that the approach should be
cover story, making Rogue a recent defector, an interview and political
recognition. Geo. L'agreed that this seemed to be the proper step and
gave us the go ahead
CO suggested that we have AFRF make official inquiry at the
various SA Embassiesand Consulates for detailed material giving
immigration requirements. This is deemed necessary because the
information is not normally given out cher the phone and Rogue
can be strusted to give CO only that information which will serve
his purpose.
He is not above telling us that an immigrant musthave
1
$ 5000.00 to be considered, etc. It is very important that Rogue have
the right answers when he applies and is interviewed for Immigration.
Geo. Lagreed to CO's suggestions and proposed that CO have AFRF.
get started on this project soonest.
1400
Wirogue was taken to Camp King where he was 1st briefed on his
story and then successfully interviewed. It is possible that
Rogue will be completely documented within 2 or 3 weeks.
30 August
CO Eg with Cus and Jack R and told them we were in need of
detailed immigration requirements:#ff
They agreed to get out an official inquiry to all the consulates
and Embassys and attempt to find out the followings
What documents are needed
What professions are indemand
How long is required for immigration processing
Does the immigrant need a certain amount of funds
Is a sponsor necessary or helpfull
What is the residence requirement for citizenship
What are the quota restrictions
Are there SA government agencies or private agencies who
agencies who will
p the Izzigrant get started
1
Noter Rogue has already told co that he cannot go to Argentina
because he has "friends" there who would gladly turn him in to
the authorities or make trouble for his in any way they could.
Rogue prefers Vuenesuela if he has a choice.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_98.jpeg ---
14-00000-
:
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE:
1 August 1963
TIME:
PLACE:
COMMENTS:
Desain
at
Case Officer
1 August 1962 – Subsistore paid.
CO visited Subj at his apt and found him getting very restless
over the delay in his South America processing. He stated he
does not want to continue to receive support from us but wants
to get someplace where he can start working and be on his own.
Subj stated that he called the German firm which expressed an
interest in his going to the Congo and was told to havé Geduld.
He stated in very clear terms that he is tired of having Geduld
and hopes that something will soon happen.
He mentioned again that he does not want to have the name
defaneshkhet. CO told him that when we got the go ahead on
SAmerican country we will discuss the whole document picture
and related matters.
B
:

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_97.jpeg ---
!
3
100000
´S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTEST WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
"
SUBJECT: W
8 August 1962
1500
Tele 1192813
813
COMMENTS:
Osteristr. 13: Apt
Dar
'
Case Officer
Orme n. Jarornat
Earvard CO and Al P. from SS went to see Subject:
and informed him that Hdqtrs wishes his resettlement to
be accomplished on the basis of documents as legalàs possible.
He was told that we will start the action necessary t
get him
a Fremdenpass and we hope a Reiseausweis. We explained that
we must work very carefully and thouroughly that when he applies
for a visa he must be prepared to give all the right answers
since the SA consulates and Embassies do not give out immigration
material without discussing the matter with the interested
individual.
Subject is a bit sceptical that
everything can be
backstopped but is willing to play ball. Al took some preliminary
informationfrom Subject and will discuss our problem with Camp King. CK
has indicated that they might be able to help us get Subject
resettled, particularly in Chile.
Subject is becoming extremely edgy and Harvard CO is
hoping that that this case will start moving soon.
i

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_96.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R•E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR-
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
15 Aug. 1962
TDE:
1100.
PLACE:
Ostendstr. 1; Apt.9
Onne
K
Crme, K. Daronnat
Nanon
o officer
COMENTS: CO picked up Subject and took him to lunch in the country
near Neu Isenburg. Subject has been extremely edgy lately and it
was felt by CO that a relaxing meal and 2 or 3 hours conversation
might have a salubrious effect
CO mentioned to Subject
Subject that if he were interested we might
be able to find a radio or something along that line for him to
build. Subject was very enthusiastic suggested that we get started
soonest.
Subject was dropped off at his apartment and CO promised.
to come by as soon as he could find something to occupy Subject's
time.
Subject was told that Hdqtrs had suggested Argentine for
resettlement because they had no quota restrictions and were in
need of technicians. Subject said that, Argentine was out of the
question since he had acquaintences there who would be happy to
stir up any kind of trouble they possible could.
According
Subject suggests that he go to SA on a tourist visa.
to him it would be much easier after his arrival to apply for
immigration since he already would be there. This reason is quite
valid and sensible but CO knows that Subject has 2 quite different
reasons for making this suggestion. 1. With a tourist visa he has
visions of having us finance him from country to country until
he finds exactly what pleases him and, 2. He figures that with
a tourist visa he can return to Europe without having committed
himself irrevocably to immigration status with all it's attendant
responsibilities for settling down, stc
:
It is also obvious to CO that we cannot trust Subject to
make inquiries himself at the various SA Consulates because he will
tell us only those details which he wants us to know and unfortunately
we hav eno way of checking since the Consulates will not give out
information re immigration over the phone.
J
Then the time comes CO feels that we may be able to get the
information we need by working through AFRF.
Sulgest prefers Venezuela.

--- Image 104-10182-10003_page_99.jpeg ---
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
DATE: 25 Jul 1962
TIME:
1000
PLACE:
COMMENTS:
Wfield
Case Officer
CO
isited
the period.
19167
Jul
rough 4 Aug.
DM 100 nubsistence for
Subi was told that a cable Was received from Hus indicating that
the people are definitely thinking about his resettlement in
South America and wanted to make sure, whether or not he had
a preference. That was why, it was explained to Subj, that
00 called on 24 July and inquired whether or not he had this
preference.
•
Subj mentioned that, he had thought seriously about his name on his
phony Austrian passport and concluded that if at all possible
he would like to retain the name Ruiner. CO mentioned that under
no pircumstionpes wpad it beer and we glad when Subj
didnot push the point.
of hotever that when it is
up the matter again.
certain where he is ring he will
To the list of documents he has previously claimed he heeds
(under his new identity) Subadied the International Drivers
Dicense.
Subj was most concerned about hig
qucstions to ascertain that d
moto
in the
nations. 00 repliad
tif
uture and asked all kind of
will be laid on when he
1
matter of the offil le
th
ng ever comes up, the
officials will not check with the Aur lane but with the
pertinent South American officials will have been informed
by us to make his entry and life in the new country a popibility.
Subj seemed to buy this but exbrenge the foot that something
could go wrong..
Before 00 left Subj Subj informed him that he will o Found to
the Venezuelan, Chilean and Colombian Consuistes and request
tourist information.
ML">
www.338
47*(4*