

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10169-10139
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SEPARATE COVER ATTAQ:SIDNT TO
2008-14304, 31 January 1968
IDENTITY
Jesse Brom, a ofurity officer
Headquarters.
INGAT

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_11.jpeg ---
?
14-00000
14
:
5
15. BENTHAM was then fully briefed on developments and ROODINE
gave certain operational information of a sensitive nature from subject
to BENTHAM. After necessary analysis and discussion the following
decisions were reached:
b.
We would endeavor to remove the family out of Frankfurt
by commercial aircraft that day, 1.e., Sunday, 17 December.
In the absence of the ability to accomplish this, we would
endeavor to remove them on an Air Force Medical Evacuation
Flight on Monday, 18 December.
Joseph Q. KLEBACK (Chief, COS/KURIOT) was contacted by
phone from HENTHAN's residence and said he believed that
his people could affix in the subject's passports a
Federal Republic entry stamp. This was considered neces-
sary in order to prevent embarrassing questions by German
Immigration Authorities on Sunday when the family would
depart by commercial air. The family had entered the
Federal Republic "black" and accordingly there was no
entry permit in their Soviet Diplomatic passports.
We would return LAPOLIA and HOODINE to the safe-house and
I would also send out one enlisted guard with sidearm.
16. A cable to Headquarters was drafted on the basis of all this
information and everyone departed the HENTHAM residence for their
respective missions. I proveeded to the Signal Center and released the
drafted cable.
17. I arrived back at my quarters about 0330 hours. At about 0410
hours I received a call from KLEMACK, wanting to get in touch with
LAPOLLA on matters pertaining to the documentation work he was trying
to accomplish. I gave him the telephone number of the Eschborn safe-
house. It turned out that the cold weather had affected telephone com
munications to Eschborn and the phone was dead. KUHACK ich went c
Eschborn and discussed his problem with LAPŪLĪÁ and HOUDINE. I an
informed, but as yet do not know the teannical reason why, that KURIOT
squid not put in the subject's passport the required German entry stamp.
It was decided at the meeting at the Eschborn safe-house that KURIOT
would try to make and have ready by the next morning [Austrian] passports
for subject and his family.
11
18. At about 0600 hours I received a call from the Signal Center
Watch Officer informing me that Headquarters "approved your plan." I
Ammediately tried to contact the Eschborn safe-house by phone but to no
avail. Around 0630 I contacted KMNACK at the KURIU installation and
was then informed by him of his earlier visit to Eschborn around 0400.
He told me during his phone conversation that LAPOLLA was going to get
up about 0700 hours. I surmised that LAPOLIA would proceed immediately
to the office and then did so myself.
*

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
L
departure. He further stated he would not agree to further travel
to the United States except by commercial jet.
Operations Office of the 7405th Flight Squadron where I was introduced
We then entered the
to ROODINE, who recited basically the same story as told by TOCHENSAY.
We also ascertained that the Flight Surgeon had looked at the daughter
and had found nothing organically wrong. We then asked ROODINE to.
bring FAGERLUND into the room where subject's family was staying and
introduce him as an "Azerican Intelligence Service Medical Officer"
and have FAGERLUND examine the child. FAGERLUND's results were the
same as the Flight Surgeon and no medication was given the child.
discussion of some fifteen minutes then took place as to how best to
proceed with onward transportation arrangements. HOODINE took me aside
and strenuously impressed me with the fact that subject was of the
opinion that certain of his information on the matter of Soviet/Finnish
relations was of great perishability and that subject deeply felt his
neosssity to arrive in Washington and state this information within
the next 48 hours. ROODINE also stated he concurred in subject's feel-
ings. All KUBARK representatives then on the soene again got together
and the undersigned made the decision to abort the mission, arrange
immediate safe-housing overnight for subject and his family, and
attempt commercial transportation on Sunday.
13. Earlier in the day LYACK informed me that he had cleared out
their Eschborn safe-house in case we should need it.
tried to contact LYACK by phone but there was no answer.
I immediately
Henry R. GAMLINGAY (Deputy for Administration Staff) and asked him to
I then phoned
do for me the following things:
8.
02
Contact Stephen R. LACKLEN (CABEZONE) and tell him we had
an immediate need to house a family of three, plus two
KUBARK officers at Eschborn. To further tell LACKLEN to
be standing by at Opel Circle opposite the Minneapolis
Honeywell Building at 0100 hours and be prepared to escort
another vehicle to Eachborn.
:
Phone BENTHAM and tell him we would drop by his house
later that evening to brief him on any developments.
6. Phone MYACK and tell him we were using Eschborn.
14. All conserned departed Wiesbaden Air Base at approximately
0020 hours on 17 December and arrived at the meeting point at Opel
Circle at exactly 0100 houre. Subject's family plus MULFALL, who had
also gone immediately to Wiesbaden, followed LACKLEN's ear to Eschborn.
FAOKRLAND, LAPOLLA, ROODING, and myself went immediately to BENTHAM's
house.
GENERY
AA1
2]

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
7.
existed a very good possibility to get the passengers aboard the air-
craft and successfully circumvent German passport controls. Naylor
contacted his own assistant and the PAA Operations Officer assigned to
Rhein/Main, both of whom are United States citizens, and asked that
they proceed to the airport and stand by to assist him in the handling
of some very important personages who were departing on PAA No. 73.
He then ascertained that only three first class seats were available ·
on this flight. He told his assistant to seat two passengers in the
aircraft lounge and he would accept full responsibility for it. This
is somewhat touchy in the airlines business as lounge seats have no
safety belts. He also know additional first class seats were available
out of London.
21. In the meantime, KLEMACK and one of his men working on the
documentation had returned to Eschborn to take pictures of subject and
his family that would be necessary for the [Austrian passports. The
best reading we could get from the KURIOT people working on the doou-.
ments was that they would not be ready on time. Inasmuch as decisions
had been made, we decided to set the wheels in motion and started the
family to the airport. LAPOLLA accordingly took off for Eschborn and
plan was agreed upon where he would arrive with the family in front
of the Rhein/Main Departure Building at 1230 hours. Naylor would be
standing by the entrance and take the family via a circuitous airport
building route to the PAA Operations Office which is located on the
second floor of the building beyond Passport Control. Naylor departed
at about the same time as LAPOLLA and went directly to the airport.
22. Earlier in the morning I had asked BENTHAM if he could effect
arrangements at the Consulate to have a Visa Officer standing by to put
United States visitors' visas for subject's family in the Austrian); pass-
ports. BHAM accomplished this and, at Naylor's suggestion, we asked
if the Consulate officer could go to the PAA Operations Office at Rhein/
Mair, and send by there to accomplish his visa work. Dy so Going wo
could save approximately 30 minutes time. I contacted Mr. Rollie White
of the Consulate office and he agreed to meet us at the airport at
1245 hours.
=
It
23. I next phoned BENTHAM and made him aware of our situation.
did not look as if we would have any unable documentation to pass the
family and would have to take the chance of wirewrrenting the Passport
Control. Our principal concern was that a German Immigration Officer
would be standing by the aircraft departure area and would ask to see
subject's passport. We could not get subject's family aboard the
regular bus that goes from the departure building to the aircraft
because there was no way we could get them to the bus loading area
without going through Passport Control, RENTHAM @sked how we evaluated
an ability to withdraw gracefully at plane side if challenged by German
190
:
:

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!
authorities. I told him the chances were better than even and that we
would appeal to the fact that this was a VIP party being handled out of
the regular airport procedures and that the passports had been left in
the PAA office. he would then put the party back in the vehicle that
took them out and just keep going. BENTHAM authorized us to proceed
with the "black" evacuation.
24. I then made one last call to KURIOT and told them if they could
not complete their work and get the passports to the airport by 1315.
hours to forget it. With that MULFALL and myself left for Rhein/Main.
25. We arrived at Rhein/Main exactly at 1230 hours as subject's
party was drawing up. The group was then taken by a circuitous route
to the PAA Operations office. It was acertained that PAA No. 73 would"
arrive at 1245 hours, approximately thirty minutes late.
26. During our wait at the PAA Operations Office, ROODINE got me
aside three or four times and kept me continuously aware of subject's
fear that an attempt would be made to sabotage his plane. He had
evidenced this concern ever since his arrival in Frankfurt, Subject'
told HOODINE he felt sure that Soviet agents would be found among some
of the employees of the commercial airlines and the management of Khein/
Main Airport. He mentioned the section of the HIS that works specifically
on assassinations and sabotage. He was fearful of any baggage being
loaded very late or any "spare baggage" that might be found aboard the
aircraft. I told ROODINE we were very sympathetic but we were not about
to ask Naylor, who had now gone much further than one could be reasonably
expected to on our behalf, to off-load the baggage of 184 passengers
and search it.
-
27. Two events happened while we were waiting in the office to
beari the parties that were of some disturbance. The airplane Captain
reported to the PAA Operations Officer that a gun was found aboard the
plane. Upon investigation it was determined that this gun belonged to
an Armed Forces courier who had carried classified material on the air-
craft to Frankfurt. The airplane saptain, upon being asked by Naylor
if there had been any unusual activities on the part of the passengers,
then described one party flying in the first-class compartment. This
flight and originated in San Francisco and was flying around the world
westboisid. At New Delhi a United States oitizen, a correspondent for
an unknown newspaper, boarded the plane with his wife and a female nurse.
The flight crew had been informed that he was an alcoholic and was being
returned to the United States at the request of the United States Embassy
at New Delhi. For part of the trip he had acted in somewhat of an
obnoxious fashion and had insulted some of the other passengers,
The
Captain had investigated the situation and was of the opinion that the
correspondent was now sufficiently drunk and lacked sufficient stamina
RIBAT
SEORET
1

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
19. LAPOLIA arrived at the office sometime shortly after 3800.
then discussed what our possibilities were, based on the situation as
we then saw it. We had no guarantee that the [Austrian] passports would
be finished by AURIOT in time to be used by an early afternoon United.
States flag commercial jet. We discussed again, as we had the previous
evening, contacting Mr. William Naylor, the Pan American Senior Officer
in Germany and a cleared and witting contact, as to whether or not he
could arrange to board passengers without going through German Immigra-
tion, 1.e., Passport Control. The question of the availability of seats
was also involved. LAPOLLA suggested that we phone Naylor in his
residence in Bad Homburg and explain to him we had a matter of serious
mirgency and ask him to come immediately to the 1.0. Farben Building and
discuss the matter with us. The phone call was made and Naylor agreed
to do this. LAPOLLA then contacted the MATS office at Rhein/Main to
ascertain if MATS had any commercial Jets chartered for departure that
day. He discovered that they had no commercial jet chartered flights
that day but at midnight on Sunday they were dispatching a C-135 con-
figured to carry 66 passengers. He was further informed that 36 of
these seats had been given to the Air Force and 30 to the Army to be
used only by single military personnel departing to the States on
Christmas leave. No families could be sent on the flight.
a C-135 is the military cargo version of a Boeing 707. LAPOLIA and myself
Inasmuch as
discussed seriously the advisability of endeavoring to get military
authority to fly this family out.
action for several reasons.
We decided against such course of
We anticipated that there would be too
much conversation among the single military personnel aboard the flight
when they observed five divilians, three of whom were obviously &
family, flying on the same plane. The fact that the six-year-old
daughter spoke no English also contributed to the adverse situation we
anticipated. Secondly, subject and family had already been aboard one
cargo type aircraft and were reported by ROODINE to have made a series
of uncomplimentary remarks of the type transportation that they were
being afforded.
20. Naylor arrived at the office at about 1000 hours and was made
generally aware of our problem. He was informed that the principal
traveler involved was a defecting Russian diplomat, plus wife and child,
and that we were under obligation to expeditiously and securely return
them to the United States by jet aircraft. He was further informed
that we laoked the proper documentation to board them on the commercial
aircraft through normal clearance procedures and we had no guarantee
that we would have the documentation by flight departure time of
PAA No. 73 at 1315 hours. We then asked him what he considered to in
the possibilities of working out a precedure to board the party "black"
and to prevent any divulgenos of their existence to the German Immigra-
tion Authorities. After considerable discussion it appeared that there
RYBAT
.

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
to insult anybody. I asked the Captain if there was a purser or a
male attendant assigned to the first-class section.
particular flight all cabin service personnel were female. He stated,
He stated on this
however, that another PAA Captain was flying dead-head on the trip, was
a big burly, sort of fellow, and if need be, could spend most of the
trip in the lounge to watch the correspondent. IDENTITY A expressed
grave reservation about now going forward with the trip because of the
correspondent. It was my opinion, however, that between IDENTITY A,
-ROODINE, and the extre PAA Captain that if the correspondent again
got obnoxious they could sufficiently cope with him. The regular Cap-
tain left the definite impression with me that the correspondent was
sufficiently drunk, that he would either soon pass out or in any event
would not represent a threat to subject's making the trip. It was,
therefore, decided that the trip would proceed. IDENTITY A informed
the Captain that he was a United States Government representative escort-
ing a family aboard the plane and requested the Captain to keep the door
of the flight deck looked from the inside during the length of the
trip. To this the Captain agreed.
'
28. Subject's party, accompanied by Naylor and the PAA Operations
Officer departed the office at 1325 hours, entered a PAA crew bus,
drove immediately to the first-class ramp and successfully boarded the
aircraft. At about 1335 KLEMACK arrived with subject's two original
Russian passports. These were then put in a brown manila envelope and
one of Naylor's United States citizen employees was asked to prossed
immediately to the aircraft and give these to ROODINE.
29. At about 1300 hours we had phoned to KURIOT and told Ralph 0.
MASSBOCK that he had another thirty minutes to get the Austrian pass-
porta to the airport because of the aircraft's delayed departure. The
11 Austrian passports arrived at approximately 1345 hours. Hollie White
immediately started to enter in those passports the United States
visitor's visas. At approximately 1355 the FAA Ground Crew Gef
notified PAA Operations that Flight No. 73 was mechanically cleared for
departure and completely loaded. At that time a PAA representative
started to run from the Departure Building to the plane with a little
piece of luggage. Naylor was coming back from the plane in the crow
bus. Ho intercepted the PAA employee and took the bag and drove it
back to the plane. He later told us he opened the bag, one of the
flight bag variety, and on his own initiative examined the contents.
It contained items of apparel used by ladies that will not be further
identified.
30. At 1400 the Ground Crew Chief stated again the plane was ready
for departure and asked why the plane was being held up. It was being
held up because White had not finished all the entries on the passports.
However, the PAR Operations Officer informed the Ground Crew Chief that
SEGNET

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
SCOREY
8/U ATT B TO BOOT-14004, 31 Jan 63
801
Chief, SR.
GYBAT
ATTN: Sherman 0. CUBICK
FROM: Chief of Station, Germany
SECRET
13##15162
Berminy
13 FEB 1952
62
RYBAS

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
J
10
the weight of the loaded plane had been questioned and they were recam
puting total the At about 1405 the Austrian] passports with United
States views were carried in a brown envelope by a PAA United States
sitten employee and given to ROODINE. The piane was then cleared for
departure and rolled out at 1414 hours.
known
The only other information inom at the time of this writing
aircraft was diverted to bermuda because of bad weather
conditions in New York. Maylor telephoned me that information about
2006 hours on Monday morning. 18 December.
2017)
SECRET
ROGER I. MOKER

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐ UNCLASSIFIED ☐
ONLY
KLECT.
☐ CONF> ANTIAL
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
sulo
10.
BAR
OFFICER'S
INSTIALS
EGOT-14004
3. Jau 62
COMMENTS (Number come to show ben
40/82
SE/peop
14/201
1.
4/20101.
ACSR/ST/P
DE/SR
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
CSR/CI
MAR
1002
1/ / Please note last
7/5/7/15/903
paid of covering
156166 meind from
JSTAR
23181
BENTHAM J
This statem
about Berlin.
ge
ms true
'G
5-6: It is not, and
Lave so informed Q.
Sad: I anga fright
suggest
appreciate a word from you,
possibly to the effect that we
AYDAT
knew day
jok
bat
dong
a good
impressed by the details.
15.
FORM
Los as 610
DIC
IRYIOUS
☑ SECRET
INTERNAL ☐ UNCLASSIFIED
☐ CONFIDENTIAL ☐ USE ONLY
•
7. & GOVERNMENT PENTING OFFICE: 1966 © +4M*H

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
NO
DISPATCH
Chief. E (ATTN:
Chief, SH (ATTN:
Chief, `K (ATTN:
RYBA t
SECRET
Matthew L. CARSON)
Cherman 0. CUSICX)
Leopard P. SACKETT)
SOMEGA AND NO
EGOT-14004
HREADGAJATERS FILE NO
FROM
Chief of Station, Germany
SUBJECT
ADMINISTRATIVE
Handling of a Soviet Defector
ACTION REQUIRED
REFERENCE
See below.
CATE
31 January 1962
RE: "43-3"
-
CHECK Y ONE)
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEƠNG REQUIRED
INDEUNG CAN BE JUDGED
BY QUALIRED HQ. DESK ONLY
1. I suggest that the story of ABLADLE, from the moment he walked into the
of Martin K. HOODINE until he was safely under Alisha custody in the United
States, deserves compiling, analysis, and publication in the form of an Opera-
tional Aid. It richly illustrates the many problems which must and can be our-
mounted, and could be highly instructive to Chiers of Station in all countries
where the next Soviet defeator might appear.
2. Here is the Frankfurt contribution (written at my request) to such a
sompilation: a eliffhanger from start to finian, but also a cummentary on the
many types of problems which can arise, and the fact that it takes hard work and
skillful improvisation to solve then. it was a cliffhanger both before and after
the Frankfurt chapter (1 nominate HOUDINE for a modal for his part) and ought to
make excellent reading.
02
3. The handling of defectors obviously is not a new responsibility to the
German Station. The CANZONE facility which exists primarily for the receipt,
establishment of bona fides, debriefing, and resettiasant of defectors has existed
hare for the last decade. Nor is the movement by black evacuation of operational
in
personnel a unique task for us to perform. Ne live, accomplished this many times
by use of our o integrated (DUNIT facility and also by the furnisning of alias
documentation to the person of interest and accomplishing the transport via
scheduled NATS flights. The significant points which made the ARLADLE case unique.
may never again in their entirety be duplicated but in part they may well be,
and therefore should be enumerated:
a. A Soviet diplomat, and member of the HIS, stationed in a non-
Satellite but politically sensitive country, whion at the time of AELADLE'■
defection was under considerable Soviet pressure.
b. The fact that the actual circumstances concerning his use of
defection were such that an immediate decision by the man on the scene and
to be made to take advantage of the opportunity.
c. The fact that little alternative could be given, under the facts
described in (a) above, except to believe the defector's statements
and acquiesce in his demands, 1.s., he possessed information of a significant
and perishable nature and would disclose it completely only upon arrival in
the United States.
d. The fact that once the commitments in (c) above were made every
reasonable effort had to be made to accommodate the defector's demand.
In order to accomplish all this an untried method of evacuation, i.e.,
black evacuation via commercial aircraft had to be accomplished in order to
successfully proceed with the undertaking.
-
4. A retrospective analysis as to how this case commenced, and the unique
factors connected with it as enumerated above, Immad me to suggest for Headquarters
study what I refer to as "findings" and "areas of study,
vindings" and "areas of study," that 1 have labeled as
"rindings" in effect represent facts which, if not present, quite probably would
have deprived us in Germany of participating successfully in the movement of the
ARLADIE family. The "areas of study," on the other hand, represent either ans«er-
able questions or matters in areas wherein operational discussions may well take
place to see if some type of school-book solution can be devised.
5. I will elaborate below, where appropriate, on some of these "findings" but
will first record themi
COPY RODYINDA
in
w/daite
137
WILADRE
i
:
inly.
19
$
:

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
VICLASSIFIED
SUBJECT:
•
☐
CONF ANTIAL
☑ SECRET
ERNAL
ONLY
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
FROM
10.
Suloc
DATE
1.
40/82
DATE
EGOT- 1400k
3. Jau 62
OFFICER'S CO MENTS (Muha
INITIALS
from
11/1/22/7
3-5
Please note last
7/5/2/15 para come
15466 mend. skrom
Benthams. Is
SR/peop
for
4/SA/1.
STAR
23759
ACSR/CT/P
DE/SR
10.
11.
asalaz
12.
13.
14.
MAN
8961
This statement
about Berlin
mis true?
G
5-6: It is not, and
Lave so informed Q,
sed: I suggest cos might
aggineciate a word for
your,
possibly to the effect that we
RYBAT
knew-den
ware dows.
me
joh hat are in
a good
mpressed by the details.
Cha
RETURN TO CI
Background Use
Do Not Reprod
15.
FORM
1 DEC 86
610
POTIONS
✓ SECRET
☐ CONFIDENTIAL
:
☐
INTERNAL
USE ONLY ☐ UNCLASSIFIED
A, GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE; {918 © =4767|||

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
12147
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION.
SECRET
KY BAT
HAKUT-14034, 31 January 1962
Porce or Navy has an assigned attache plans to establish procedures whereby the
Air or Naval Attache will advise COS of any absence of the attaone plane, the
point of designation of the aircraft, and the duration of the absence. There
have been previous defections unere attache planes were used
At the initial
vehicle of black evacuation. In the evacuation plan of [Stockhola for AELADLE
they informed us by onble that they proposed to use attache plane. He are
of the opinion that when the statement was ande Steakho] made the assumption
the plane was immediately available. As an later discovered by us the
particular plano in question was at Wiesbaden and not Stool. This, however,
was some six hours after St] stated its intent to use that aircraft.
While in this particular case matters eventually worked out successfully the
story might be otherwise in a different set of facts.
Priority furnishing of trace. When a Station is alerted to a request
to render operational support to the movement of a defector and simultaneously
answers a request in the negative if it can furnish traces, the following
vosdure is worthy of study. If Headquarters pussesses, and time permits, va
believe it worthwhile to forward an immediate summary to the Station rendaring
support if the background of the defeater is much that it would be a matter of
local interest. This would have been the case in AELADLE. As subsequent head-
quarters debriefing developed (and we assumed it would have been disclosed in
arters traces) AELADLE had previously been stationed in Berlin. Had such
facts been known here, and had time allowed, certain debriefing on the Berlim
period designed to elicit any matter of immediate concern could have been under-
taken.
10%/
Attachment
Namo dated 18 Dec 1951 h/o
Identities uno/tap
Distribution
2 - EB w/atta
✓ -
&R w/atts
ME w/nŝta
FORM
10 530
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
REPLACES FORMS
51-28, 41.78A AND $1.29
ECRET
PORI. D. BERTHAN
CONTINUED
FAUX
4/90

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
JECK BT
RY BA8
BOUT-1\\4, 31 January 1962
.. Tha »isdom of ALMARK maintaining in the European ares at least one field
installation having assigned to it persunal representing the many competencies
necessary in the intelligence undertaking has been recufirmad.
5.
The wisdom of obtaining appropriate security clearances, and having
Stations brief and make witting of at least an AIS contact, the resident senior
United States citizen personnel of United States flag air carriers operating
sitain any Station's area.
c. The fallacy of depending on marginal or obsolescent equipment to
accomplish sensitive tanks of high priority. we here refer to 17-year C-54 ass=
craft.
d. A realimtion that a ratio exists between the number of people ande
aware of a given undertaking in relation to the obstacles encountered in success-
fully accomp.laning trat undertaking.
wo
6. A few words of elaboration are in order on the four pruneasing points.
Because the initial endeavor at black evacuation by Klink aircraft aborted, we were
given an opportunity to see with great clarity the application of these points. IS
the attempt to evacuate by Alan-assigned aircraft had been successful, then
knowledge of the defection could have been held to approximately air staff and
assigned military personnel. Because that endeavor was unsuccessful, at least nine
additional staff and military personnel.. became-generally or specifically aware of the
matter, plus the Consul General and one of his senior officers. Additionally one
private United States citizen, the senior Pan American official in Frankfurt, became
Ty such & care of this sensitive case. This increase in the number of individuale
came about bonause of an immediate noed late in the evening of Saturday, 16 December,
to use two staffers to assist in the safehousing function, a total of six
MKTOPAZ staffers (documentation, graphics, photographie) to prepare and issue.
framulent and alias passpurts, and an assigned enlisted man to act as a safehouse
guard. The Consulate Jeneral had to affix visas to the fraudulent passports. The
most crucial individual involved," however, was the Pan American official who to a
certain degree put his position in jeopardy by being as cooperative on the matter (la.
he was without previously-having cleared and briefed this official (His counter-
part in Thi is also so cleared and briefed) the whole undertaking would rave been
precluded. It would have been impossible to accomplish departure without documenta
tion on a commercial aircraft without the connivance of the commercial airline
involved. Indeed with suan cunnivance it was difficult and risky enough. Finally,
the point concerning cbsolescent equipment speaks for itself. leadquarters in fully
aware of the feelings of this Station concerning the inadequacy for our purposes
of assigned aircraft. Suffice it to say that when defectors apparently of signifi.
cant value refuse to ride such aircraft the matter merits thorough study.
7. The matter of "areas of stuly" appears to un to encompass at least the
fellexing:
... Average time differences in transmitting high precedence electrical
gemmunications between and among representative groupings of station Toe
German Station is extremely fortunate in having Aw-26 circuits with wood-
quarters. It affords un a fhoility for instantaneous communication. We oun
make cortain rough estimates as to how long it might take appropriate lead-
quarters officials to answer our queries and we can then approximants the
arrival time of answers to high precedence traffic. Other Stations, however,
do not have KM-26 equipment, all do not have the same type of cryptological
equipment, and there is a different pattern as to the type of circuitry, i.e.,
direct leased lines, twx, straight commercial servics, etc. Na bolieva thero
is merit in the appropriate Meadquarters unit enloavoring to group geograph=.
ically Stations and then based on the type of ommmunications and cryptuingical
equipment and the channel of transmission to come up with predictions as to
the average length of time the transmission of a priority or operational
immediate cable would take between and among the various representative
groupinga. In the case under study, which represented a rather fast-breaking
situation, it was not possible for us to slimsty the length of time it took
to transmit an operational immediate cable beton Studora and Frankfurt.
It would have been of value to us to have had some this matter.
A
D. Cuantinating between U.8. Air Attachos and Cus. to believe it would
be worthwhile to request each Chief of Station in a location where the Air.
-
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
FORM
REPLACES FORMS
SECRET
FAQE NO.
21000

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
BALL
:
143
- TO EGOT-14004, 31 Jan 1962
18 December 1961
MORANDUM FOR: The Record
SUBJECT:
Handling at German Station 16 and 17 December of
Soviet Defector from Russian Embassy at Helsinki
1. This memorandum is designed to record, soon after the event,
all facts pertaining to the handling within the German Station of the
evacuation of a Soviet Vice Counsel (and member of the RIS) from the
Russian Embassy at Helsinki. At the time of this writing there is
still lacking certain information to complete the entire atory. How-
er, it is felt worthwhile to record all events while the memory ia
still fresh. In the following paragraphs the defector is referred to
as "subject" and pseudonyms and identities are used in all other cases.
2. At approximately 0730 hours Saturday, 16 December, Arnold J.
LYACK (Chief,[CABEZONE) contacted me at my home and asked me to proceed
immediately to the residence of Joel D. BENTHAM (Chief of Station).
Upon arrival at BENTHAM's residence, BENTHAM and LYACK briefed me on
the Stockholm] cable which announced Stocking's intent to endeavor to
fly subject and family "black" from Stockholm to Frankfurt aboard the
Air Attache aircraft. Cable also requested Frankfurt to have an air-
craft available to receive immediately subject and family and take off
forthwith to the United States. LYACK also mentioned an IN cable from
DIR which requested [Stockholm] to move family soonest to [CABEZONE in
Frankfurt for establishment of bona fides.
3. We then adjourned to the office and awaited more word from
either Stockholm which would advise on the arrival time of the family
at Frankfurt, or from Headquarters concurring in Stockholm's] request
for immediate departure of the family for the United States upon
arrivai ať Frankfurt. EAQB was immediately alerted and they made
arrangements to have a C-54 with augmented crew prepared to depart for
the United States by 1200 hours. A compartment for the subject's
family was put in the C-54 and the regularly assigned tail number was
removed and a false number put on the aircraft. Conrad V. LAPOLLA
(Acting Chief: COS/KUSODA) was contacted and asked to come to the office
immediately. Discussions were then held with LYACK and Carl T. UPDILL
as to the availability of a KUDOVE onse officer with Hussian language
capability to act as escort.
And
RYDAT
SEGNET
;
And

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
!!
14-3
4. Having heard nothing from either [Stockholm] or Headquarters
by 0945 hours OPIM traffic was sent in both directions telling them
Germany was prepared to receive and effect immediate black evacuation
of the family to the United States.
determined that IDENTITY A would be used as the security escort and
In the meantime, it had been
Russel K. MUCHANE (AD/PI Staff) would be on standby to serve as a
EDNE escort. This was a contingency arrangement because we lacked
_knowledge whether or not a KUDOVE officer from either Helsinki or
[Stockhola] was prepared to travel with subject all the way to Washing-
ton.
5. Around 1100 hours I asked Edward P. TOCHENSKY (Chief, EAQB)
to establish contact with the Wiesbaden Air Engeztower and lay on
arrangements to monitor the flight of the Stockholm Air Attache plane.
This was done because we have had previous instances of "black"
arrivals at Wiesbaden where the aircraft actually arrived before the
EZA cable from
ETA cable from the Station dispatching the body/4-At about 1115 hours
TOCHENSKY informed me by telephone that the [Stockholm Air Attache
aircraft, a C-45, was and had been at the Wiesbaden Air Base since.
12 December. At about 1130 we cabled this information to Stockholm] 14-3
and DIR and also offered to dispatch an aircraft to Copenhagen to make
the pickup if [Stockholm could move the body there. Because of
technical difficulties involving air clearances and "lengths of runways,
we could not immediately get into any field north of Copenhagen.
6. At approximately 1145 hours a cable was received from Head-
quarters concurring in the immediate evacuation from Wiesbaden by KAOB
aircraft of subject's family upon arrival.
arranged we were then requested to hold subject and family at (CABEZONE.
If such could not be
214-3
02
7. Having heard nothing from (Stockholm by approximately 1600
hours: we again sent them OPIM traffic asking that they inform us
immediately of their intentions.
about 1430 hours in order to get some lunch and take
I had previously left the office
twu personal items. I had called Nelson R. POLIAKOFF (Deputy for
care of one or !
Administration Staff) in to cover for me and had briefed him on the
then current situation. when I returned at 1600 hours MUCHANE had
came into the office prepared for the trip.
mentioned cable and suggested that MUCHANE return to his quarters and
We then sent the above-
await further developments. I phoned TOCHENSKY and suggested that he
and his communicator return to their quarters. LAPOLLA, in the mean-
time, had gone to Rhein/Main Airport to meet an incoming staffer carry-
ing classified material and get him through Customs.
to his home, I left word with the Signal Center Watch Officer that
He then returned
any incoming traffic on subject's trip should be telephoned immediately
to LAPOLIA who would come in, review the traffic and contact mẹ. The
SECRET
91
'

--- Image 104-10169-10139_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
i
Watch Officer was also asked to immediately phon: the Wiesbaden Com-
municator who in turn would contact TOCHENSKY and both of them would
go to their office.
8. At approximately 1900 hours LAFOLLA contacted me at home from
the Signal Center and informed me that an ETA and other information was
in from Stockholm] I told him to stand by and I would immediately come
in. Based on Stockholm's cabled statement that Martin K. ROODINE (Chief
of Station, Helsinki) was escorting subject to the United States, T
told LAPOLLA not to alert MUCHANE. I arrived at the office at 1930
hours and immediately dispatched the Guard Sergeant to buy certain
types of foods and magazines that Stockholm asked to be put aboard the
14-3
United States-bound aircraft. We contacted TOCHENSKY and ascertained
that EAOB was in a state of immediate readiness.
(COS/KUSODA Office) then arrived with IDENTITY A.
David it. MULFALL
IDENTITY A was given
a general briefing on the mission and his responsibility following
which he and LAPOLLA took off immediately for Wiesbaden. They took
with them the purchases of the Guard Sergeant.
9. I then proceeded to the home of Ronald M. CORBANE (COS Lawyer)
where we were guests for dinner. At approximately 2200 hours I received
a call from LAPOLIA that subject and family had arrived, the turnover
was made, and that the EAOB aircraft was airborne at approximately 2150
hours. I telephoned this information to BENTHAM.
10. At approximately 2245 hours I received a call from the signal
Center Watch Officer who relayed to me the following message from the
Wiesbaden Communicator. That message stated the EAOB aircraft was
immediately returning to wiesbaden because of a sick passenger.
ately thereafter I received a call from LAPOLLA who was at the quarters
of Arthur G. DREIBELLIS (EAOB) in Wiesbaden. LAPOLIA stated that he
Immedi-
had gotten hold of the Air Base Flight Surgeon and was proceeding to
the Air Base. He knew at that time no other details.
E. FAGERLUND (COS Medical Officer) and myself would leave immediately ·
I told him Chester
for Wiesbaden Air Base.
11. FAGERLUND was in attendance at the same dinner party and we
departed immediately for the Air Base. Upon arrival at approximately
2300 hours the EAOB aircraft had already landed and reaximior segurity
provisions were observed in the area. Air Police had the "Har.gar 34
Area" blocked off two blocks in either direction.
12. TOCHENSKY met me outside the building and informed me that
immediately after take-off subject's six-year-old daughter had become
extremely airsick and suffered respiratory difficulties, Nha waz
administered oxygen. The mother became hysterical and the father
demanded that the aircraft immediately be returned to its point of
27, 14-1
"
4/90