

--- Image 104-10167-10083_page_1.jpeg ---
104-10167-10083
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
14-00000
:
SECRET
Diaz
Lamy
22 September 1959
MEMORA SHUN FOR THE HECORD
SUBJECT: Conversations with HEICHHARDT, 8, 9, 16, 17 September 1959
1. On 8 September Reichhardt phoned to report the following:
He took Marcos DIAZ Lans to the office of INS on Mon-
day, 7 September to take care of his immigration
states. (Comments I was later called by Bill CUTTER
of the Alien Branch, CS concerning tria. COTTER said
that when they reported this to INS - that service said
that LFFEENS, the IXS man in Miami has told them that
DIAZ' bearing had already been held shortly after his
arrival. COTTER implied that Bernie was not reporting
accurately on the situation in Nimi. I have not re-
peated this to bernie, because Alien Branch seems to be
in something of a tissy in regard to the new people in
INS with whom they are dealing as a result of recent
transfers of personnel.)
b. Barnie asked me to clarify what I wanted in the way of
an affidavit of support for the wife of Marcos DIAZ.
I dictated a simple statement and told Eerals to have
it notarized and accompanied by a bank statement or
similar document indicating WILLIAMS' ability to support
Mrs. D should it become intessary.
Bernie reported that Mrs. Catherine TAFE, the inter-
national busybody claims that she is going to Cuba on
our instigation. She is accompanied by her entire
family. This information came from the Miami Chief
of Detectives to the 00 Representative.
d. Bernie asked how he could identify himself to the three
evacuees in Miami we have instructed his to contact re
going to the Dominican Republic on our behalf. I told
hin to use Dave Morales' name.
He asked me for information on our dispatch to Cara in
conosction with the PRCs for AMCOO and the gift. I
told him I'd check and let him know. (Comment: The
same day I saw a dispatch from davans answering the
questions, an info copy of which went to Bernie.).
-
SEGRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce

--- Image 104-10167-10083_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
[SECRET
2.
2. I phoned Reichhardt on 9 September and we discussed the following
natters:
8.
04
I told him about the visit of Angel ROS. He said
had talked with bERS] on this matter and that EYES
reported that EOS came to Siani on 1 September and
left on 3 September. E thinks it is a secret
police agent. Bernie is to see for details on
this.
(Cossment: Reichharit's report was received
on 11 September.)
b. Reichhardt asked me to check on his money situation
since no deposit has been mide.
04.
e. Reichhardt saked if I had seen copies of the nous
letter being distributed by Emilio 2 Portuando
called Latin American Events. N NEZ is listed as
editor and publisher and the firm is Latin American
Affairs Inc., 1023 Connecticut Averne, Washington.
The first issue was published on 7 August. The 17
(Consents
August issue includes a list of Communists.
I an arranging for the CIA library to procure loan
copies of the publication for me to review.)
☑
hin,
KINEZ was in Miami last work. CRINGA did not see
but according to ORTEGA's scurces, strongly in-
plied that be has succeeded in obtaining US support
in the Departments of State and Defense including
comitments for training sites in the United States.
NUNEZ also said that he is in touch with Col. King.
This was covered in U-15.
3. On 15 September I talked with Reichhardt concerning the followings
b.
c.
Ricardo LORIB say ROS. Bernie will see LCRIE about this.
Bernis will see FOX this week.
The addresses for the two evacuess who cane by way of
El Salvador are not correct. I told Bernie to try to
find out where they are from the third, with whom
is in contact.
d. Bernie asks that his local travel order be renewed.
(Comment: I checked this and the order has been
reneved through 31 December 1959.)
4. On 16 September the following matters were discussed with
Reichhardt:
SECRET
4/BR

--- Image 104-10167-10083_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
SECTET
2.4.
'a. SAXJENIS: He called in the morning to ask for infor-
mation on this man. According to keichhardt, LCHIE
says that he was firer from the DIER for anti-Com-
munist activities and was expected to arrive in Miami
last night. KRE is worried about him because of his
previous post as No. 2 man in the . The Cuban card
confirms that be held the latter post..
b. De LCRIB says that he knows HGS well, and likes hin.
They met in Miami last week. RCS is in Miami again.
E08 is principally interested in getting Beynaldo
BLANCO out of Cuba. RCS says he was told the American
Embassy can have no part of this but suggested he (ECS)
ask De LCRE to see his Miami contect about assistance.
Bernie discouraged LCKE about helping BLANCO. Bernie
feels it is orange that Station Havana would tell RCS
about LORIE's Miand contact and that the former night
have mis-represented what was said. (Consent: ke can-
not positively identify BLANCO - although such an indi-
vidual was listed by LORTE and the LIAZ Lanz as an Arwy
officer. He may have been one of the 1957 regular army
plotters.).
ICHIE also asked help in converting Pesos to dollars.
Bernie did not give him an answer on this.
d. LORI said he wants to establish contact with ROS.
The plan we have so far only envisages communication.
RCS in Havana to LORIE. while bernie would pre-
far to handle the matter personally, I think I con-
vinced him that this is unfeasible because of the
danger of provocation. He therefore suggested having
Cheesman brought into the picture, monymously, as an
Individual who would get in touch with LORIE when there
is something for him from ROS. - and who will call LORIE
periodically to find out if LORIE wants to transmit
anything to ROS. This sounds OK to ne. Bernis will
see CESMAN] within the next few days on this.
04
04
e. LCREE told Fernis that Cuban opposition views BONSAL's
trip to the US as a victory for the opposition - but
that if BONSAL returned to Cuba they will view the
return as a trimph for CASTRO.
f. According to an 00 source Mrs. Katherina TAAPE will be
returning to the US from Caba in a few days. She told
at least one American in Cuba, Harry Rosenfeld, that she
is working for CIA.
SECRET
21BR
1
i
'

--- Image 104-10167-10083_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
!
SEGRET.
4.
g. In connection with my earlier query re the report from
Cube that the Revolutionary Air Force is planning to
remove a couple of planes from the US to Cuba without
an export permit, bernie got the following information
04 [ST:PS] A Cuban air force mission is in Miaison-
cerning the aircraft. The Cutans are happy with the
04 way BIERS has handled things for them even though they
don't have the export license yet. BY:25 has been asked 04
to a party in Havana to be given by Juan Limeida in his
honor. He may go on Friday. Do we have requirements
for him?
5. On the morning of 17 August I phoned Bernie to tell him about the
followup on the report concerning the planes (Haba 2653). He said Reynolds 03
phoned him on the evening of 16 September about this. Bernie said the passed
the information to Customs, who said that since the Cuban Air Force are the
owners of the planes (they are AT 6's) there is little that can be done if
they file flight plans for a local flight and then leave for Cuba. They
asked Bernie for suggestions and ne said he had none. (ETERS reports that 04.
the Cubans asked his if he could find American pilots for the planes
and he said he'd try, but actually has no intention of doing so. BIERS] 04
was impressed at the speed and accuracy of our information, but believes
that the Cuban Government is being precipitate in expecting to get the
planes out.
SECRET
03
[T. d. notes/
I.
WH/III/AD
7/BR