

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10227-10150
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
:
SELLET
10 October 1961
MIMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
BUBJECT; Meeting with Dr. MIKC Cardona on 6 Üctober
1. Dr. MIRO arrived about 9:50 a. m. for the meeting we had
set at 10:00; again he was driven by his secretary whom he introduced.
As during the first meeting, she remained outside in the car. Our
ressting lasted until 12:00 noon.
2. First, Dr. MIRO handed me a note in longhand listing the
topics élecussed with me on Cctober. These points are:
8.
Croups conducting propaganda, etc. with Agency support
should receive their support and be coordinated through the Council.
b.
atened at:
A propaganda campaign should be waged by the Council
c.
(1) Caba, via a long wave radio station in Key West.
(2) Cubans in Miami and other. U. S. areas by:
(a) Subsidising Diario de las Americas.
(b) Contracting for time on radio stations.
(3) Latin America, with a plan such as the Operacion
Grieta."
Underground Activities.
(1) Provision of monthly funds to Council for procuring
Cuban pesos to send to the seven-odd resistance
groups in Cuba through reliable channels (such as
previously sent through the Italian Embassy).
'
1

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_5.jpeg ---
T
*14-00000
1
SEULET
Supreme Court, but that now he considered LABAU unfit to hold any
Judicial position.
8. Members of the Revolutionary Council
Dr. MIRO:remarked that he had a meeting of the Council on
10 October. I asked what elements now composed it and what he pro-
posed to add. He named the following as presently in the Consejo:
Rescate
30 de Noviembre
- MAR
Accion Democratica
20 de Mayo
AAA Independiento
MDC
Montecristi
Ho said he had invited to join:
MRP
Unidad Revolucionaria
and awaited their reply.
He would also like to have the Workers, Students, and the
Professionals (Doctors, Lawyers, etc.) come into the Council. He be-
lleves Batistianos and Comunistas and elements unwilling to cooperate.
should be excluded, but that all other groups should be brought together
under the Council.
Ho contends that all anti-Castro activities, except clandestino
and military, should be coordinated by members of the Council, but that
the excepted activities should be known only to him (MIRO).
9. Probable Argentine Rupture of Relations with Cuba
Dr. MIRO declared that he believed imminent the Argentine
rupture of relations with Cuba. He said the Argentine Ambassador to
Cuba (Julio AMOEDO) was ordered to return to Havana (he had been
vacationing in the U. S. after FRONDIZI's visit); that VILLANUEVA, a
Secretary of the Argentine Embassy in Cuba was coming to see MIRO
today; and further that he (MIRC) had received a phone call last night
:
=

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_2.jpeg ---
$14-00000
:
SECRET
(2) Commando action as outlined in plan presented
to ma un ó October.
3. Commando Plan
Then Dr. MIRC handed me a plan (in English) for clandestine
action prepared by his military collaborators, whom he named AS
Colonel Manuel VARELA Castro, an officer of the Academy, Captain
Enrique DESPAIGNE, and Colonel (inu) MONTEAGUDO. He stated
that they were of the BARQUIN group and had been prisoners.
With respect to the plan for clandestine operations in Cuba,
he stated that 300 men could be counted upon for commando action, part
of them'bore, part in Cubs. He reiterated that a commando operation
was essential to bolster morale among the anti-Castro elements in Cuba
and in exile sa well as to conduct sabotage that would further weaken
Cuban economy and the Communist regime. He said that for this operation
U. S. help would be necessary in providing weapone, amnimo, demolitions,
equipment, and funds. He proposed that if this plan was considered to
have merit, that I arrange to have someone moct with his military mon
to work out the details. After all preparations had been made and
materiel provided, etc. the operation would be purely a Cuban affair.
(NOTE: Plan turned over to Thompson at our ne eting at 15:30 on
6 October for transmission.)
4. Request for Arma, etc. to send to scambray
Dr.MIRO remarked that over a month ago he had made a request
to Clark for arma for the anti-Castro insurgents in the scambray, but
to dato bad heard nothing relative to the request. He commented wryly,
“I ask but never hear an auswor. He said that the fighters there should
be supported. Dr. MIRO stated that he had a boat (provided by us) and
a means for delivery of the arme. Cavaldo RAMIREZ is chief of the
I scambray group.
COMMENT: Has anything been done about this request?
3. Information on Arms Heceived by Castro Regimo
Dr. MIRO handed me a long report which he said was brought
to him by the Argentine Ambassador to Cuba wben the latter came to the
U. 3. at the time of President RONDIL's visit. * He said the Ambassador
would not divulge the source of the information but commented, "You will
know.'
* Report turned over to Thompson on 6 October.
2
i

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_4.jpeg ---
--
i
'
14-00000
Before such an action in undertaken, the enemy must be
softened by propaganda, sabotage, raids, underground action, and the
mass of the people of Cuba must be prepared to accept the provisionai
government through propaganda, increased knowledge of the Council
and its unifying efforts.
Dr. MIRC asked me what I thought of tblo project; did i think
that Castro could be overthrown in any other way. I admitted that
strong military action appeared necessary. I stated further that
of course his plan would have to be studied at the highest government
levels. He proposed that he might elaborate a plan with his military
collaborators, and I suggested that he do this so that it might be examined
and considered.
Dr. MIRO declared that he was convinced that this Communist
degger in the side of the States could only be eradicated by such action,
that the U.S. Is and will be blamed for all anti-Castro propaganda,
sabotage, etc. and that enemy states will denounce it for intervention
In Cube, but that if the U. 5. goes to the aid of a friendly revolutionary
regimo established in the country and helps it defeat the Soviet-backed
Communist regime, all friendly governments will appland.
"I have no personal political ambitions, declared MIRO.
"I merely am trying to chair the Council, whose mission is to unify the
anti-Castro elements inside and outside of Cuba. If the team isn't co0-
sidered effective, then change the pitcher. But I believe the Council must
establish itself on Cuban soil, and soun. Time is against us. "Thu ¡unta
del Este agreement will backfire against the U. 5. if Castro is allowed
to remain in Cuba. In a year, after the politics of the countries re-
ceiving U. S. and have gotten their hands on U. 8. gold, they will say,
"Thanks to Castro, ve got this.' And they will spend it as in the past
with no benefits to the social and economic welfare of the people.
7. Views about the Judges and Lawyera
+3
I queried Dr. AHIRO as to his views relative to the judges and
lawyers and their future status, Ho salú ho boped that they coulé all
reunite and that they could be given assistance as in the past. He de-
clared that Dr. ALABAU was not qualified to be a justice and that he was
daing nothing but making politics and trying to discredit the Council
and MJRC and VARONA. Dr. MIRO doclared that he, as Prime Minister
in the early days of the Castro government, had named LAZAU to tho
-
!

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_3.jpeg ---
"
14-00000
5.
SLUNET
Dr. MIRO vald there was no way to determine the accuracy
of the figures given of planes, guns, etc, received from the Soviet bloe
(and haly and Canada) but even if the figures were exaggerated 100 per
ceat, they would still be impressivo.
Ho added that Castro io daily becoming stronger militarily
with weapons and with a large militia of close to 300,000 boing trained
to use them while the economy continues to deteriorate. Ferhaps only
half the militia would be effective. But that is siseable. Thus, he said,
the longer the delay in positive military action to overthrow Castro, the
greates will be the task. *We must act soon, vigorously and effectively,
to insure victory. Another defeat would be disastrous and would make
Cabinas, Latin Americans and others believo Castro to be invincibia.
Then would come accommodations and even worse, the traplanting of
Castro-backed regimes in the bemisphere. And the U. S. would suffer
worst of all, being discredited for defeat and "guilt of interforence. "
“in the UN no nation would stand boside the U.
6. Proposal that Connell go to Cuba with Commando Group and
Establish a Government on Cuban soit
Dr. MIRO then declared that he was convinced that Castro
would never be overthrown by all the propaganda, the sabotage, commando
raids, guerrilla activities, rupture of diplomatic relations and deteriorating
scononly, and that it was inconceivable to establish a government-in-exile
for nothing would come of it; that the only solution for defeating the
Castro regime was for the Revolutionary Council to go to Cuba and estab-
lish a government on Cuban soll, ask recognition by all friendly countries
and military assistance of its principal ally, the U. S., and that the U.S
be ready to intervene immediately with its Forces. "This would all have
to take place in a matter of 48 hours, otherwise it would fail. I recognise
that this is a bold plan, but boldness is necessary. There will be many
risks, many may be killed. As for myself, I don't care if I die. I have
lest all my personal possessions and my son is a prisoner. *He reiterated
that all must be well prepared in advance, there must be no vaciliation,
everything must proceed rapidly. First, a commando raid in force to
seins a piece of Cuban territory, preferably near Guantanamo, and inanie-
diately the members of the Council go ashore, proclaim a provisional
government, broadcast by radio to all nations an appeal for recognition
(and cables prepared in advance would also be sent out), request U. S.
assistance, and the U. 5. should furnish such assistance at once in ade-
quate strength to ensure victory.
:
I
I
3
;

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGNET
from a Spaniard (Nicanor FERNANDEZ) in Buenos Aires, urging MIRC
to go to Buenos Aires to arouse anti-Castro sentiment of the people,
Inasmuch as some Argentine action against Cuba appeared imminent.
(FERNANDEZ said he had already written MIRC a latter.) MIRO says,
"Of course, I cannot go. I have the Consejo meeting on the 10th..
Furthermore, I am going to New York on October 11th or 12th for the
SIP (Socioded Interamericana de Frensa) meeting and have been allotted.
12 ininutes to address the meeting."
10. MIRO to attend Homage to LACERDA (Brasilian who
Precipitated QUADROS' resignation) on October 15
Dr. MIRO said he planned to remain in New York City (after
11 and 12 Cctober SIP meeting) until October 15th to attend the hornago
for LACERDA, the Governor of Guanabara province in Brasil. MIRO
probably will stay at the Park Chambers Hotel, but will advise Clark
of his location.
I commented that I would probably remain in Washington next
week in view of his plans, but that I might go to New York City to meet
with him; if so, I would get in touch with him and arrange a meeting
time and place through Clark.
11. Propaganda Cominission
I asked Dr. MIRO about his ideas on the future organization
and structure of the Propaganda Commission. He stated that it is out-
side the Consejo and not under his direct control, although the Council
accountant has been passing funds to it. He said CARRILLO had resigned
as head of Propaganda and that he would like CONTE AGUERO to handle.
it. He claimed that MESTRE had not done anything with propaganda,
12. MIRO's Views Relative to Supreme Court Justice or PRIO
being Recognised as Head of a Provisional Government
'
I asked Dr. MIRO if he believed that there were many anti-
Castro Cubans (both in and out of Cuba) who favored PRIC, or the head
of the Supreme Court to be the provisional president if a government were
to be established on Cuban soil. Dr. MIRC declared that the revolution
is a fact, and that practically nobody wants to go back to any former
rogime. . The people in Cuba would resist any such possibility. He de-
6
"

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_7.jpeg ---
"
14-00000
SEGEET
nounced FRIC's activities against the Council and its efforts to unify
the anti-Castro elements. He said that the people should be given an
opportunity to elect their chief of state after Castro's overthrow and
reestablishment of order in the island.
13. Offices of Council (Consejo Revolucionario)
When questioned about his business and private telephones,
MIRO said, "The business phone is also in my house. I have no office
except in my house, but that phone is always busy (Jeffersɔn 2-4680).
So use the other phone (JEfforson 4-2751) when you wish to call me.
"I need to have a small office somewhere away from my home
because all the activities there are driving my wife crazy. I want to..
find something modest so that no accusation can be made of ostentation
merely a room for myself, one for my secretary, and one for meetings.
of the Council, atc. The FRD had a place but at that place also was the
pross, the refugee center, etc. It would not be satisfactory. The FRD
to now practically dead. It was the forerunner of the Consojo as the
unifying agency of the anti-Castro resistance, "
14. MIRO. Views on Coordinating the Activities of Other Exito-
Groupe
After Dr. MIRC reiterated his view that he should be the
channel for funds and coordinating the activities of groups outside the
Consejo such as the Students, FORD (Labor), etc., I said that I under-
stood that some of these elements were unwilling to function under the
Consejo, and that in view of that situation, did he consider that an..
Activity Committee might be organized with a delegate from each of
these groups and under the chairmanship of a member of the Consejo.
This would serve to coordinate their activities, give them a tie-in with
the Consejo, yet not make them subservient to it. Dr. MIRO replied
that this would merely set up another Consejo outside of and parallel to
the existing Consejo. I did not pursue this further, not having enough
background of these organizations to be able to discuss the matter
effectively.
15. Telephone Conversation with MIRO on 7 October
Before my departure from Miami for Washington on 7 October,
I telephoned to Dr. MIRO from the airport. He appreciated the call and
asked if I had seen in the morning paper the action taken yesterday by
=
r
:

--- Image 104-10227-10150_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
the ALABAU Lawyers' aroup in proclaiming Julio CARCERAN (one
He ex-
of the chief justices in exile) as "President of Cuba at War.
pressed his indignation at this unilateral "political" move by ALADAU
and his adherents among the exiled lawyers and judges. He added his
best wishes to me and reminded me that he would probably go to New
York on October 11th or 12th for the SIP (Sociedad interamericana de
Prensa) moeting. I replied that I would appreciate if he would contact
Clark after his arrival to give his location in New York City, and that
Clark might have a request from me for an appointment with him, if
this seemed desirablo. I suggested that in future phone conversations
I would be known as JUANITO. He agreed with pleasure that this would
be a good proceduro. I wished him Godspeed and he replied likewise
to.me
16. Comment
-
During these first two meetings I endeavored to establish
myself favorably with Dr. MIRO and therefore refrained from bringing
up details of budget or opposition to any of his specific proposals.
I listened, asked various questions, and he talked at length.
In future meetings, after I have gained further background and
have more policy guidance, I shall be able to discuss with him specifie
issues and endeavor to reach agreements or compromises, as may be
required.
T
1
1
R.
ANZIELLE MINNEGGURAZI