

--- Image 104-10226-10001_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
pented that it was the opinion of several officers in
the Clandestine Services that some of these FBI sources.
were under Soviet control whereas the FBI believed them
to be genuine.
'
0. In summing up our position on the KOSENKO case
for Ambassador Thompson, the DDP referred to the kinds of
information the Soviets had given up through NOSENKO.
sade particular reference to the Jolmson ese and observed
lie
that if the Soviets were prepared to provide this kind of
build-up to insure the success of NOSENKO's mission,
must then be very important to them. In conclusion, the
it
DDP said that he would send a letter for the record to
Mr. Hughes on the topic of NOSENKO to which Ambassador
Thompson agreed.
David E. Murphy
Chief, SR Division
;
}
i
i

--- Image 104-10226-10001_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10226-10001
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
:
.
MEMORANDUM FOR EXKORD
SUBJECT:
21 y 1965
Yuriy Ivinovich (NOSENKO,
1. The DDP and Chief, SR met with Ambasador
Thompson in his office to advise hip of our plans to
to
proceed to hostile interrogation in order clarify the
205110 case. The DDP explained that while we had reached
a fira conclusion late last year that NO was a pro-
vocateur and that hostile faterrogation was in order, we
decided to review these conclusions with representatives
of the FBI. After some unsoldable delay, a series of
meetings was held with the FET at the level of Deputy
Director for Security, Mr. William C. Suffiran. The find-
ings of the FBI, which agreed generally with our own views,
were formulated in a letter to the Director signed by John
Edgar Hoover. A copy of this memorandum was shown to. Ambas -
sador Thompson by the DDP with the comment that the FBI
and ourselves now have a common understanding on the case
which was something both the DC1 and the Director, FBI,
agreed would be necessary.
'
2. DDP seat on to say that we would hope to begin
hostile interrogations in the near future but before we
did, we wanted to discuss the case with Ambassador Thompson
in light of the various contingencies which might arise
DDP felt that
during the course of these interrogations.
it was preferable to advise Ambassador Thompson well in
advance of our intentions so that if consultations with
the State Department becany necessary on a contingency
basis, Ambassader Thompson would be in possession of the
background. Ambassador Thompson first asked if we were
sure that NOSENKO could not escape and ter himself into
the Soviet Embassy. We told him that we bed established
him in a country house with a large security guard which
we felt made escape improbable. Ambassador Thompson then
asked if there was a possibility that NOSENKO might commit
suicide. We said psychiatrists did not believe he was the
type to do so and that our security surveillance was such
that we were alert to this possibility and would try to
prevent it. Ambassador Thompson also wondered if there
had been any communications concerning NOSESIO from the
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10001_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
:.
:
-
Soviet side. ke replied diere had been nonë since the
confrontation Fast year following NOSENKO's arrival in
this country. We then mentioned the attempts on several
noccasions by NOSENKO's wife and mother to contact him
through the Embassy in Moscow but added that these attempts
ceased in March 1964 and nothing has been heard from them
since.
3.
Ambassador Thompson then asked if XOSENKO had
provided information which would discrédit any American
officials. We answered in the negative, pointing out
that he had reported on former French and Canadian
ambassadors We later qualified the statement on Americans,
pointing out that NOSENKO did provide information, on a few
Americans of lesser rank as well as private citizens.
.
•
F
4. The DDP then noted that after we reached a
point of no return in our interrogations, we might decide
that NOSENKO would have to be turned back. Ambassador
Thompson expressed concern that the Soviets might use this
: action to discourage defections. We explained that when wẹ
came to the point that a turn-back appeared desirable, we
would hope that a statement could be made by the U. S. Govern-
ment which would establish NOSENKO, as a provocateur.
DDP then described the AEJOYFUL, case in brief terms to
The
Ambassador Thompson, emphasizing the parallel planning and
the possibility that a quadripartite statement by the govern
ments might be considered. The DDP did note, however, that
AEJOYFUL" was in British hands and that they have the major
responsibility even though we and other security and intelli-
gence services had agreed on the handling of the case.
DDP then noted that in past cases where we had turned back
people with intelligence backgrounds at their own request,
the Soviets had not made publicity capital of these actions.
!
The
5. The earlier mention of our discussions with the
FBI recalled to Ambassador Thompson some of the material on
Soviet political issues which he has been receiving recently
from the FBI. He commented that it was his very strong im-
pression that the information was being fed to us by the
Soviets. He said that it either consisted of information
we already knew or that which the Soviets would not object
to our having. He asked our views on this. The DDP com-
-