

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_1.jpeg ---
400000
104-10064-10012
TO
INFO.
FROM
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
Chief, Sov Bloc Div; Chief, Far East Division
Chief, WOMUSE/ICG
Chief of Station, Tokyo
Tokyof
RYBAT MHPASHA REDTOP
-
SUBJECT
☑
ProcessaNG ACTION
(MATES FOR MORE
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
MICROFILM
Beheiren and the Four U.S. Navy Deserters
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
TOKYO 7263
As noted in reference, forwarded herewith is a copy of the sub-
ject memorandum. Please note that the information in the memorandum
Paragraph B. 4. b) is particularly sensitive and should only be
given properly restricted dissemination.
maik J. halzemel
Mark J. LIDGERWOOL
ATTACHMENT
Memo dtd 27 Nov 67
Distribution
Σ - C/SB Div w/1 cy attach
C/FE w/1 cy attach
C/WOMUSE/ICG w/1 attach
1
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CLASSIFICATION REVIEW
Conducted On 6-10-76
E42 IMPDET CL BY 060595
CS COPY
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
FJTA-53 626
t
NOWN TEE BL
classification
8603
DATE
DEC 6 1967
CLASSIFICATION
HQS FILE NUMBER
SEURE TRYBA UNKNOW

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
ATTACHMENT 3
SECRET
Partial Listing of American and Other Foreign
Persons Known to Have Been in Contact with or
Cooperated with BEREIREN
Americans.
Staughton Lynd (ex-Yale professor)
2. Norman Hailer (novelist)
3.
Dave Dellinger (Editor of Liberation)
4. Howard Zinn (Boston U. professor)
6.
Donald Keyes (National Committee for a Sane
Nuclear Policy)
David HcReynolds (Chairman, War Resisters'
League)
A. J. Huste (now deceased)
8. Karl Meyer
9. William Davidson
10. Bradford Lyttle
11. Charlotte Thurber
12.
13
(Hiss) Quentin Bassett (Students for a Democratic
Society)
Murray 'Levin (Boston U. professor)
14. Robert Ockene (Veterans and Reservists to End
the War in Vietnam)
15. Carl Oglesby (Chairman, Students for a Democratic
Society)
16. Barbara Deming (Associate editor of Liberation)
17. Joan Baez (folk singer)
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Attachment No. 2
Some BEHEIREN Activities and Accomplishments
1. Regular once-per-month demonstrations at a public park in
Tokyo, consisting of anti-American speeches and followed by street
marches.
2. An all night TV "teach-in" with BEHEIREN activist leadors,
along with special guest, U. S. pacifist Carl Oglesby (Chairman of
the Students for a Democratic Society.)
3. A full page advertisement in the New York Times (16 November
1965), `followed by another full page ad in the Washington Post
(3 April 1967), appealing to Americans to stop the war in Vietnam.
4. A "Meet in Conference of Two Nations for Peace in Vietnam,"
held in Tokyo in August 1966, and attended by BEHEIREN activists and
seven U.S. pacifist leaders (including Dave Dellinger), and observers
from France, England, Canada, the USSR, Pakistan, and Mongolia.
5. A mass meeting in Tokyo in October 1966, guest speakers of
which were French pacifists, Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir.
6. Nationwide tours of Japan for lectures and peace rallies for
such anti-Vietnam war pacifists as Professor Howard Zinn and the late
A. J. Muste of the United States, Claude Bourdet of France, and Thich
Nhat Hanh of South Vietnano
7. À mass meeting in Tokyo in January 1967, sponsored by
BEREIREN and featuring U.S. folk singer and pacifist Joan Baez.
8. A continuing program of direct distribution of pamphlets to
U.S. troops stationed in Japan, and those coming to Japan on warships,
and for rest or hospitalization from Vietnaz.
9. Participation by two BEHEIREN activist leaders (Kyoto
University professor KUWABARA Takeo and International House staffer
TSURUMI Yoshikyuki, täking advantage of a trip to the U.S. to attend
a non-political Japan-America Congress on Cultural Problems) in
anti-Vietnam war speech rallies and demonstrations at Dartmouth
University in early May 1967, followed by an unsuccessful attempt
to invite Cassius Clay to visit Japan on behalf of BEHEIREN.
-
10. Continuing efforts to bring to Japan for a nationwide
+
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
speech tour on behalf of EEEIREN, Soviet poet Yevgeni Yevtushezko,
an effort that has not yet reached fruition but is still per
11. Participation in the Stockholm July 1967 "World Conference
on Vietnam," by sending two BEHEIREN activist leaders as delegates.
i
12. Cooperation with the U.S. Quakers, pacifists, and Earle
Reynolds in sending the yacht "Phoenix" with medical aid, first to
Haiphong, then on a second trip in the Fall of 1967, secking but
failing to find landfall to deliver medical aid to either North or
South Vietnam.
13. Attempted, but failed due to inability to obtain U.S. visa,
to send a BEHEIREN activist leader (NUTO Ichiyo) to the U.S. to
participate in the 21 October 1967 anti-Vietnam War demonstrations.
-
14: Currently carrying out a fund raising campaign to send an
aid ship to North Vietnam. In this, and other activities, BEHEIREN
leaders are maintaining ever closer liaison contact with their
counterparts abroad, such as the French "Coñite' Vietnam National.'
In an effort to generate public support for this aid ship fund
raising campaign, BEMEIREN succeeded in issuing a public appeal,
under the endorsing signatures of Tokyo Governor MINOBE Ryokichi and
Yokohama Mayor ASUKATA Ichio, as well as the usual Intellectuals
supporting BEHEIREN.
15.
A
In October 1967, BEHEIREN solicited approval to hold anti-
Vietnam War demonstrations in front of the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo,
expecting to be denied and then intending to make this denial a court
test case. Instead, BEHEIREN was given this permission, and conducted
two orderly and well-publicized demonstrations in front of the American
Embassy, garuering a larger public turn out of participants than in
any previous BEHEIREN-sponsored demonstration.
16. Assisted and abetted the defection to the USSR of four
American sailors from the U.S. Navy carrier Intrepid. Following this
success, BEHEIREN's most effective activity to date, BEHEIREN leaders
are organizing a permanent "underground railway" of Japanese intell-
ectuals who will volunteer their homes as possible "way stops" for
hiding future U.S. military deserters that BEHEIREN now hopes to
induce.
Comment: For other details, see Tokyo intelligence reporting:
FUT-11547, 31 May 1956
FUT-12046, 14 October 1966
BT-12690, 10 May 1967.
E-12851, 5 July 1967
PUT-13081, 8 September 1967
FUT-13154, 27 September 1967
FT-13303, 22 November 1967
Also, 055-6790, 11 July 1967
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-3-
7. Mrs. Erdenebat Ojon, Mongolia
8.
9.
Konstantin Shugnov, USSR
Francis Marcel Kahn, France (Comite' Vietnam
National)
10. Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, France
11. Thich Nhat Hanh, South Vietnam
COMMENT
This is not, by any means, a complete listing, nor
does it necessarily list BEBEIREN's most important
activist contacts abroad. But this list is re-
presentative in showing the breadth of BEHEIREN
liaison abroad, particularly with the American
"new left".
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
18. Ira Morris (Paris expatriate)
19. Otto Naisan (phonetic, New York City peace activist)
20. Barbara and Earle Reynolds (divorced but separately
ective long-time residents
in Japan)
21. William B. Christensen (an American pacifist drifter,
who gave BEHEIREN its first
experience in the summer of
1966 in exploiting for pro-
paganda in Japan, and then in
arranging the onward journey
of an American who wanted to
defect to the USSR)
22. Brian Victoria (head-shaved pacifist and "converted"
Buddhist priest, known to be in
regular contact with the Soviet
Embassy in Tokyo)
23. Mr. Willowby (fnu, phonetic, "chief of the Quaker
Peace Action movement in the U.S")
24. An unidentified American of Japanese descent, from
Hawaii, who is currently a student at Waseda University).
25. Kosaku Yamaguchi (reportedly born in U.S., present
citizenship status uncléear) (formerly
was a professor at Momoyama University
in Osaka, but has been teaching at the
University of California in Berkeley
for some time)
Other Foreigners
1. Mikhail Kotov, USSR (Soviet Peace Committee)
Claude Bourdet, France (French Committee to Support
the Vietnamese People)
Peggy Duff, Great Britain (Campaign for Nuclear Dis-
armament))
James Endicott, Canada (World Peace Council)
5.
Faiz Ahmed Faiz, Pakistan
6. Gabita Muslepov, USSR
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
ATTACHMENT. 4
THE YOMIURI
YUICHI YOSHIKAWA,
YOSHIKAWA, sec-
sec-
retary-general of the Japan
Peace-For-Vietnam Commit
bitee
tee (Beheiren), tells a press
conference Tuesday that the
four deserters of the US war
ship Intrepid hoped to stay
in Japan but the Beheiren
could not help them to do so.
22 No
23
Wednesday
4 US Deserters Possibly
Left Japan Aboard Baikal
The four deserters from the US aircraft carrier Intrepid who made a dramatic tele-
Vision appearance Monday in Moscow are believed to have left Japan irregularly
by the Soviet-liner. Baikal which left Yokohama on November 11 for the Far East
Soviet port of Nakhodka.
:
in which they could utilize (noodles) and shochu."
drink
1
"
.
•
Sources in the Metropolitan test against the Vietnam war,
Not Worried
When he first met the deser-
Police Department said Tues- at a press conference held No ters, they were
day that the four Americans vember 13 in Tokyo.
practically
could have boarded the ship by
penniless but appeared quite
a special gangway for Soviet serters first wanted to live
· Yoshikawa said that the de unconcerned, Naito said..
He said the deserters ap
Government officials.
peacefully in Japan and asked living on cheap Japanese food;
Japanese watchmen were on the Behelren 'to find them jobs, and
Parently enjoyed hippie life,
guard at another gangway for
ordinary passengers when 222 their English proficiency.
such as udon:
listed passengers. including
eight Americans, boarded the they could not: live in Japan if possible in Tokyo.
The Beheiren told them that wanted to live in Japan, and
He said the four Americans:
liner before it departed Yoko without being found, by the
hama at 11.50 am, November 11. Japanese police or US military decided to ask the help of the
Nalto and his friend. Yamao.
The watchmen told police authorities sooner or later, Yo-
that they did not see any per shikawa sald.
Beheiren and
son who was not on the pas
delivered the
four men to the Beheiren.
Lived Like Hippies around November 26.
senger list board the ship
through the ordinary gangway.
Hiromi Nalto, 20, a painter: Naito said he believed that'
It was learned that 17 offi- of Tokyo, told The Yomiuri all the four Americans were
cials of the Soviet Embassy and Shimbun that he and his not communists and that they
trade mission in Tokyo and friend, Sansei Yamao, a hippie had no interest in communist
_scores of visitors boarded the poet and member of
"
the ideology.
Baikal through the special for the deserters and the decided to go to some neutral
Beheiren, acted as go-betweens He said the four must have
The police sources said that
country via the Soviet Union
it was "quite possible" that the
Naito said he met two of after they learned that they
Soviet authorities in Tokyo ar Dick D. Bailey, 19, and Airman A spokesman for the Justice
the four
a
deserters Airman could not live in Japan.
ranged the deserters' exit...
Mike A. Lindner, 19 at a hip- Ministry said Tuesday
Beheiren Pledge ple hangout in Shinjuku there was nothing legally
Yuichi Yoshikawa, secretary around October 20.
wrong' in the four Americans
general of the Japan Peace-For-
He said both Americans leaving Japan because the ad-
Vietnam Committee (Beheiren), wore leather jackets and other ministrative agreement in the
told a press conference Tues- informal clothing which they Japan-US Security Treaty gua-
day that the committee could said they borrowed from their rantees US military personnel
disclose how the four Japanese hippie friends hang- the right to come, to stay in
Americans left because it had ing around the Shinjuku area. or leave Japan.
promised. not to do so.
Bailey and Lindner and the He said he understood that
other two-Airman John M. the four Americans were tech-
Barilla, 20, and Airman Ap. nically still enlisted US mill.
20-Went around in pairs; Furthermore, if their exit
prentice Craig W Anderson, tary personnel.
Naito said.
took place on November 11, it
Lindner stay overnight at his made an official request to the
Naito said he let Bailey and was before US authorities
house in Hayamiyacho, Neri- Japanese police to search for
ma-ku, from: October: 24 to 25. them, he added.
gangway.
not
•
He neither affirmed nor dent
ed the report that: the Amer
icans left Japan by the Baikal
on November 11.
1. It was the. Beheiren which
announced for the first time
the desertion of the four crew
members of the Intrepid to pro
Beheiren:
.
.
•
..
that
'He also said there were no
¡Japanese laws allowing charges
•
to be preferred against the
Beheiren officials and other Ja-
panese people who "protected"
the Americans in Japan and
helped their departure to the
Soviet Union.
-

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
3"
32
SANKEI (Full)
November 21, 1967
Prof. YOUNG Says Four American Deserter Seamen Not in Japan Any More
Went to Tokyo and Tried to Dissuade Them;
Probably Escaped from Japan on the 12th or the 13th
(New York, November 20, Correspondent Tadashi ONODERA) Professor
a Ernest PiYOUNG of Dartmouth College in the U.S., consented to an interview
I with this reporter on the question of the four American seamen who deserted
I from the U.S. aircraft carrier Intrepid. At the interview held on the 19th,
Professor YOUNG clarified that the Peace for Vietnam Association (Beheiren,
with Makoto ODA acting as its representative) contacted an anti-war organiza-
tion in the U.S., and at this, Professor YOUNG hurriedly visited Tokyo, and
a meeting the four seamen in a room in an apartment house in Tokyo on the 9th
Band 10th; tried to persuade them to return. In regard to the present where-
prabouts of these four seamen, he made the noteworthy statement that "those
(four were still in Japan, up until the night of the 11th, when I left Japan,
* but they are probably no longer in Japan now comersia
wires are and jeho pURTO MAROT SUDKY DAL
* Families Perplexed
TAD
who c
30
T
The questions and answers exchanged with Professor YOUNG are as follows:
Tom -- Why did you go to Japan?
LL
Professor: Beheiren contacted David DER KINGER, a pacifist activist
in the U.S., asking him to "send someone to Japan to hear the stories of
* the four seamen and announce them in the U.S." I have been in Japan twice,
and I also once served as special assistant to Ambassador REISCHAUER.
During that time, I became friends with Beheiren representative ODA" and
T: other intellectuals in Japan. It was for these reasons that I was given
this assignment. I personally have never participated actively in the
Or anti-Vietnam war movement so far. LADÇÀUNTA
(n)
35
seamen?
When did you arrive in Japan, and where did you meet the four
✓ Professor: I arrived in Haneda on November 8, and met the four seamen
Soon the 9th and the 10th. The place of interview was in an apartment house
in Tokyo, but I cannot say at this time where that apartment house was and
a: who owned it. However, on both days, I talked fully with these four seamen,
be for more than three hours on each occasion (according to an investigation
made by the public security authorities, Professor YOUNG. arrived in Japan
toward the evening of the 8th, and stayed at Hotel Tanakanwa in Shiba,
Is Minato-ku, until the morning of the 11th).
DISH &
':
quro -- What were the motives for these four seamen's desertion?
"
Professor: The desertion was completely the decision of these four
persons. It seems that the four seamen decided not to return to the ship,
1 when the Intrepid entered Yokosuka Port on October 17, and they were per-
au mitted to go ashore for rest for one week. My impression on meeting these
four seamen was that they were definitely not deserting for the purpose of
chself-advertisement or that they were giving false reasons. I am convinced
# :that they deserted really out of doubt about the Vietnam war.
What were the movements of the four after they deserted?
APP
.
The
Professor: On the night of the 23rd, two days before the Intrepid
was due to sail, the four went to Shinjuku, and told the people whom they
met at a bar they happened to visit, that "we are fed up with war."
☐ Japanese who heard them sympathized with them, and at one time, the four
lived with some hippies (according 'to this paper's investigations; they
include Mr. K., a student of Tokyo University's Liberal Arts Department,
and vanguard artist A., who gather at Fugetsudo in Shinjuku.). Finally,
•

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
on
they were taken to Beheiren by a student who spoke English (according to
this paper's investigation, this was Mr. S., a Waseda University student).
After that, they were hidden by Beheiren. I cannot say where they were
hidden.:
PENS
Were the four firmly determined: to desert?
Professor: My purpose in visiting Japan was to dissuade the four.
I explained to them what the results of their desertion would be. I even
told them that they would never again be permitted to stand on American soil
✓ their fatherland. At the time I met them, it was still at a stage where
they would only receive light punishment, if they reported back immediately,
saying that they "had missed their ship." However, their determination was
firm, and my persuasion had no effects. ::o
•
•
The four seamen's desertion was announced in the form of a press.
interview given by Beheiren. Were there no facts of their having been
forced to desert, during that period? es
"Professor: I ascertained that point, too However, they firmly denied
any fact of their having. been forced, saying that they had voluntarily
consulted Beheiren as to whether they should publicly announce the
intention to desert, and if so, in what form this should be made.
Where are the four seamen now, and where are they planning to go?
Professor: I am certain that the four of them were still in Japan,
up until the 11th, the day I left for home. However, they already knew
fully well that it was not possible for them to obtain asylum in Japan..
They even said that "we will probably have to go to some third nation,
which is neutral." (The public security authorities judge that the four
seamen left Japan immediately after Mr. YOUNG's persuasion, and consider that
on they probably were smuggled out of Japan after the 10th, and before the
evening of the 13th, when Beheiren announced their desertion at a press
conference. However, Mr. YOUNG says that the four seamen were in Japan up
until the night of the 11th. Therefore, the possibility is strong that they
were smuggled out of Japan by ship, between the night of the 11th and the
bo evening of the 13th.); page word, eg w
·
"
The films showing the four seamen were shown publicly in the U.S.,
by too. What were the reactions in the U.S.?
•
▸
Professor: When the films were publicly shown, there was big excitement,
with rows and rows of television and press cameramen. I thought I would be
exposed to persistent questioning by the FBI and the CIA, after I returned
home, but so far, I have only been questioned once by the Navy's Intelligence
C Section, about the circumstances. It seems that American authorities con-
cerned do not want to make too big a fuss over the matter.
i
-- What do the parents think of this action taken by their sons?
• Professor: A certain television station asked the mother of one of
the four men about her son's life. This mother was completely perplexed,
saying: "My son is a most average American youth. His school records
were quite ordinary, and he liked sports, just like any other student.
I cannot understand why he acted in such a way!!
I.
"
LORNEY
2 OLATGE
Tank
33-
HOW T
KH

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRE
27 November 1967
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
SUBJECT: BEHEIREN and the Four U.S. Navy Deserters
Origin and Development of BEHEIREN.
1. Founding: BEHEIREN (Japan "Peace for Vietnam" Com-
mittee) was organized in April 1965, nominally as a politically
Independent group of intellectuals and cultured persons whose
purpose was "to help restore peace in Vietnam." Actually, it
is a loosely organized group of ex-JCP members, progressive
intellectuals, leftist cultured persons, and leftwing students
banded together in the name of opposition to the Vietnam war
by two common denominators, dedicated anti-Americanism and
refusal to be dominated or controlled by the orthodox Japan
Communist Party.
•
2. Hard-Core Secretariat: The real force behind the
organization of BEHEIREN, right from the beginning to the
present, has been a brilliant Communist named YOSHIKAWA.
Yuichi, whose conspiratorial organizational skills bave
been perhaps the most indispensible ingredients in BEHEIREN's
development. YOSHIKAWA was expelled from Tokyo University
for his role as a ZENGAKUREN leader in the 1960 U.S./Japan
Security Treaty riots. He then went into fulltime JCP mass
movement professional work, becoming the Secretariat official
in charge of international relations for the Japan Peace
Committee. YOSHIKAWA broke with the JCP in late 1964,
following the rupture in relations between the JCP and CPSU
in May that year. The inspiration for EEHEIREN springs in
large measure from YOSHIKAWA's personal desire to use his
organizational talents in countering the JCP and its Japan
Peace Committee. YOSHIKAWA, in addition to being a well
qualified English linguist himself, years ago surrounded
himself with a small following of similarly qualified
licutenants, whom he brought along into BEHEIREN to give
him the necessary depth and experience to run this new
organization. YOSHIKAWA functions as BEHEIREN's Secretary
General.
!
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
3.
SECRET
-2-
Chair-
ODA has
Respectable Intellectual Front: Following funda-
mental Communist principles for mass movement work (better
than the JCP itself follows these tenets), the ex-JCP
organizers of EIHEIREN kept themselves in the background
and lined up a number of prominent Japanese progressive
intellectuals and leftist cultured persons to front for
BEHEIREN. The choice of ODA Makoto, ex-Fulbrighter and
populaṛ young novelist, to be the chief front man
man- was an extremely lucky stroke for BEHEIREN.
taken to this grand-standing, front work like a duck to
water. It has given him a chance to give unbridled vent to
his own latent anti-American foolings, puffed him up to the
extent that he has been dubbed "the emperor" by other BEHEIREN
activists, and given him at long last an ideological mission
to pursue. YOSHIKAWA has performed magnificently in feeding
ODA's ego needs and in infusing and indoctrinating ODA so
that his words and actions take on sufficiently viruleat
anti-American overtones. ODA has served another vital
function for BEHEIREN by recruiting a sizeable number of
fellow intellectuals to join the ranks of BEHEIREN activists.
(Attachment 1 is a listing of a number of those Japanese who
have been identified as active BEHEIREN supporters or sympa-
thizers.)
4. Organizational Development: In its 2 1/2 year history,
BEHEIREN has not appreciably changed its organizational format,
although it has moved its office three times and modified its
name even oftener. PEHEIREN is not a "mass organization", be-
cause it has had no sizeable popular backing to the present
time. Its hard core, secretariat organization is run by
YOSHIKAWA and his lieutenants. Its public image, intellectual
Intellectual
front is led by ODA, and given body by a score of like-minded
intellectual friends of ODA and YOSHIKAWA, who form the loose
body of BEHEIREN's activist leadership. Under this BEHEIREN
leadership superstructure lies a paltry base of only several
hundred BEHEIREN "rank-and-file" supporters, mostly young
Japanese students. Organizationally, EEHEIREN has no formal
membership system, so its base of supporters is fluid and not
precisely measurable. However, the base support for BEHEIREN
has definitely been on the upswing during 1967, and made such
notable strides during the past summer that JCP Headquarters
officials finally felt constrained to note with concern that
BEHEIREN was beginning to drain off a growing number of pro-
gressive youth who otherwise would have been absorbed into
the JCP's own youth movement. BEHEIREN leaders have tried to
help this growth along by setting up a youth section, calling
it "Young BEHEIREN.” BEHRIREN'☎ imaginative actions and
publicity-conscious programs have been responsible for its
recent growth, and this period of growth seems to be now on
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-3-
the verge of really picking up speed and momentum. As a result
of its role in the case of the four deserting sailors, BEHEIREN
has reaped bountiful publicity, has succeeded in touching a
delicate Japanese public nerve of sympathy and pacifism, open-
ing a floodgate of support for BEHEIREN from all over Japan.
When this case fades from the limelight, it is still most
likely that a fair percentage of current wave of popular
support for BEHEIREN will solidify into permanent mass backing,
giving BEHEIREN, for the first time, a meaningful base to
support its future activities,
5. Activities and Accomplishments: BEHEIREN has engaged
in a number of propaganda actions, and participated in inter-
national anti-Vietnam War activities. It has tried to co-
operate with certain front activities in Japan controlled by
the JCP, most notably the Japan Committee to Investigate War
Crimes in Vietnam activities, which culminated in the Tokyo
Court of last August, but has been soundly and rudely rebuffed
by the JCP. In spite of this, BEHEIREN has churned along at
its own pace, with a continuing series of anti-Vietnam war
actions, most of them related in some way to the American
pacifist movement. In this regard, BEHEIREN has succeeded in
cornering a virtual monopoly on Japanese contacts with the U.S.
pacifist movements, and has effectually capitalized on this to
promote its own action program. The case of the four deserting.
sailors, while an apparent lucky windfall for BEHEIREN, only
points up the fact that BEHEIREN, through past organizational
work and promotional activities, was "johnny-on-the-spot",
ready and capable (unique in Japan in this regard) to take
the ball and run with it. BEHEIREN ran all the way in this
case and scored its most notable success since it was organized.
(Attachment 2 is a listing of BEHEIREN's more notable activities
since its founding. Attachment 3 is a partial listing of
American and other foreign persons known to have been in
contact with or cooperated with BEHEIREN.)
.
B. The Case of the Four Sailor Deserters and BEHEIREN.
11 How It Started: The consensus of all available overt
media material, with no recorded dissent, indicates that the
four sailors voluntarily left their ship, went AWOL, and ended
up wallowing around Tokyo's hippie-land. Precisely what personal
grievances prompted the four to embark on this mis-adventure is
not yet known. But, up to this point, the four could fairly be
categorized as misguided youngsters, gone astray in a foreign
land, and due to get slapped back in line with traditional
Navy justice when they finally decided to stop the fun and go
back to the ship. So far, this made their cases far from
unique…
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Attachment No. 1.
Japanese Who Have Been Identified as
Active DEHEIREN Supporters or Sympathizers
1.) YOSHIKAWA Yuichi (BEHEIREN Secretary General)
member.
4 +
- former JCP
2. ODA Makoto (BEHEIREN Chairman) popular novelist.
3. KAIKO Ken - Akutagawa prize winning növelist.
4. KUBO Keinosuke film producer and director.
5. TSURUHI Shunsuke Doshisha University professor
6. TSURUMI Kazuko sister of Shunsuke (thoir father is the late
philosopher, Yusuke).
7.
-
FURUYAMA Yozo high school teacher.
8. MUTO Ichiyo ex-JCP (tried to travel to U.S. to represent
BEREIREN at October 21 demonstrations this year, but was
denied a visa to enter the U.S.)
9. YAHADA Atsushi
10. FUKUDA Yoshiyuki
ex-JCP.
playwriter.
11. TOMINAGA Ichiro
cartoonist.
12. FUKASAKU Mitsusada
professor:
13. AWAZU Kiyoshi - graphic designer.
14. TAKADO Kaname Christian leader.
15. YOSHIDA Kiju film director.
16. UMIFARA Shun
writer.
17. HASHIKOTO Mineo
Buddhist priest.
18. HOTTA Yoshie
novelist.
19.
GOTO Hiroyuki
10. KUWABARA Takeo
scientist.
professor at Kyoto University.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
SEGRET
2. How It Became an Incident: But instead of returning to
their ship of their own volition or being apprehended by the
Share Patrol, the four made contact with BEHEIREN leaders.
Again, press reports indicate that this was just a coincidence,
that there was no pre-planning by the four to contact BEHEIREN.
There are no available overt nor covert reports that indicate
otherwise. But, once the BEHEIREN people made contact, they
recognized the potential immediately and moved fast for the
hill. (Attachment 4 is a Yomiuri Newspaper clipping, 22 Nov-
ember 1967, that is both a representative and comprehensive
account of this phase of the case. Even if this article
should contain some minor inaccuracies, the basic line seems
factual and has not been challenged elsewhere.)
3. BEHEIREN Takes Over: When the four made contact with
BEHEIREN, it suddenly became an entirely different ballgame.
BEHEIREN had everything needed to capitalize on this: veteran
activist leaders who are experienced enough to recognize the
windfall that had come their way; an apparatus that could
provide hiding places for the four; long standing liaison
contacts with Soviet Embassy officials for use in planning
exit from Japan; solid contacts with reliable American
pacifists with whom the bona fides of the four sailors could
be checked; money and organization to capitalize on the
propaganda potential (such as preparing a movie film for the
initial BEHEIREN press conference announcing the desertion,
prepared more likely than not by BEHEIREN stalwart EUEQ.
Keinosuke, an independent film producer) and English speaking
activists capable of sympathizing, encouraging, soothing, or
agitating the four young sailors, so that there would be no
turning back.
•
C
The BEHEIREN Apparatus At Work: While many of the
small pieces of this puzzle, which would put the whole case in
proper detailed chronological order and eliminate speculation
on minor points, are still missing, enough is known now,
through overt and covert sources, that the picture of BEHEIREN's
adept handling of this case shines through clearly. The follow-
ing elements, all part of the BEFEIREN apparatus, make up the
bulk of the picture:
a) Hide-out: When EEHEIREN got hold of the four on
about 26 October, they had to be hiden out for the approximate
two week period until their exit from Japan could be arranged.
This presented BEHEIREN no great logistical problem. A number
of the BEFTIREN activist leaders have homes well suited to
harboring fugitives. For example, BEHEIREN activist leader
FUKASAKU Mitsusada has a villa hidden away in Chigasaki, which
was used on the night of 12 September for a meeting of about
20 top BEHEIREN leaders, and which would be highly suitable
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
-5-
WE
for hiding the four deserters. Other private-dwellings, be-
longing to BEHEIREN leaders and loyal supporters, are scattered
throughout both the Kanto and Kansai areas.
4b) BEMEINEN/Soviet Liaison: REHEIREN Secretary General
YOSHIKAWA has maintained periodic contact with Soviet Embassy
officials for years. BEHEIREN Chairman ODA has met Soviet
Peace Committee officials in Moscow. The exact means of how
this liaison was accomplished in this case is precisely known
from a covert phone tap on the Soviet Embassy's line. A full
transcript is available of two phone calls made on 30 October,
first by Brian Victoria to Chief Press Attache Nikolay V.
Vasilyevich, and second by YOSHIKAWA to First Secretary
Sergey D. Anisimov, urgently requesting a private meeting
later that day to discuss "an extremely important, extremely
delicate matter", without doubt the case of the four sailors
c) BEHEIREN/U.S. Pacifist Liaison: BEHEIREN contacted
Dartmouth University professor Ernest P. Young, who flew to
Japan on 8 November, apparently helped BEKEIREN leaders check
out the bona fides of the deserters, and returned to the U.S.
on 11 November. (Attachment 5 is the translation of a Sankei
Shimbun article, dated 21 November, reporting an interview
with Young, giving his version of his role in this case.)
5. Escape to Moscow: The four deserters turned up in
MOSCOW on 20 November. The press has speculated widely and
unanimously that the four left Japan on the Soviet passenger
ship Baikal on 11 November. Again, there is no dissenting
opinion, overt nor covert. The only mystery concerning this
final phase of the Japanese portion of this case concerns the
mechanics of how the four boarded the Baikal and who assisted
in this maneauver. But with the sailing of the Baikal from
Yokohama, BEHEIREN completed its most highly successful and
beautifully executed activity in its 2 1/2 year history. Not
only did BEHEIREN smear the American Government's image in
Japan, not only did BEHEIREN gain a vast amount of priceless
publicity that will swell the ranks of its supporters and be
invaluable in future activities, but BEHEIREN doubtlessly
even made a profit, financially, on this low budget operation
donations are still pouring into BEHEIREN Headquarters from
all over Japan to "help and protect U.S. deserters".
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
SECRET
21. SAKAMOTO Yoshikazu Assistant professor at Tokyo University.
22. HIDAKA Rokuro professor at Tokyo University.
$
23. IIDA Momo
writer.
24. TSURUMI Yoshiyuki
25. TERAI Minako
26.
ANAI Fumihiko
employed at International House in Tokyo.
27. NASU Masanno
28. MATSUMOTO Ichiju
29. FUKUTCHI Setsuo
30.
KURIHARA Yukio
31. etc: ANDO Jimbei, CHIBA Hido, EGAWA Taku, FUJII Nittatsu,
HARIYU Ichiro, HOSHINO Yasusaburo, ICHII Saburo, IKEYAMA Juro,
ISHIDA Takeshi, KANAI Yoshiko, KASAI Seiichi, KATAGIRI Yuzuru,
KATO Shuichi, KAZAMA Michitaro, MATSUURA Sozo, KIDOKORO Hasao,
KITAKOJI Satoshi, KOBAYASHI Shoichiro, KOMATSU Sakyo,
KOBAYASEI Tomi, KUNO Osamu (Shu), KURODA Hidetoshi, MARUYAMA
Masao, MIDORIKAWA Toru, MIZUSAWA Yana, MORITAKI Ichiro,
MUCHAKU Seikyo, KURAMATSU Hiro, NISHIO Noboru, NOMURA Koichi,
OGOSHI Terno, OTSUKOTSU Yoshiko, SERIZAWA Tae, SHIRAI Shimpei,
SHINHEMA Takeshi, SHISHIDO Hiroshi, SUGIURA Hitsuo, SUGIYAMA
-
Tatsumaru, SUZUKI Masahira, TAKEUCHI Yoshitono, WADA Nagahisa,
YAMADA Nunemitsu, YAHADA Toshio, YAMAGUCHI Kosaku, YAMANI SHI
Eiichi, YASUDA Takeshi, YOSHINO Genzaburo, YOSHIWARA Koichiro,
OKAMOTO Taro, MATSUMOTO Seicho, EI Rokusuke, IZUMI Taku,
AWAYA Noriko, KATO Yoshiro, SHIROYAMA Saburo, TAKAHASHI
Taketomo, ODAGIRI Hideo, OKUMA Minoru, SANO Kenji, SUZUKI
Hichikiko, KUBATA Hanya, SHINOHARA Seiei, MARUTAMA Kunio,
SECRET

--- Image 104-10064-10012_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
COMMENT
SEGRET
TSURUSHIMA Sotsurei, MURO Kenji, KONAKA Yotaro, SAKAMOTO
Yoshikazu, SAITO Masahiko, etc.
Although not recorded here, many of the above persons
are ex-JCP members.
SECRET