

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10226-10024
1..J.
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RECURU MATERIAL
1. THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.
2. RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES,
RM GA-50, ON OR BEFORE DATE INDICATED.
3. IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL. EXTENSION
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
179a use previOUS EDITIONS,
4598
(47)
INESS CA-10
5. Cerbat
S.
0.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15. RETURN TO:
IP/ARD/PSU
FORM 610
3-02
02-01
USE PREVIOL3
FDITIONS
13-78)
GA-50
SECRET
433936
ash
CENTER
52777 BOX2
ATELY AFTER USE
TO RECORDS CENTER
14
÷
To Requester:
Please return this reference
to IP/ARD/PSU immediately after
use.
JOB NO.
SPACE NO.
RECORDS CENTER
78-3-777
433936
FILE NO.
DOCUMENT
FOLDER NO.
BOX NO.
3
2
-
!
CONFIDENTIAL
E2 IMPDET CL BY: 062147
INTERNAL
☐ USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
$
1 JAN 67 thru
AMSCROLL
FEB. 1968
the
FOLDER#3.
:
19-120-26
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIO PART VI

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
"
INDER ☐ YES ☑ NO.
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO..
X REF TO FILE NO
PILE RID
RET.
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
DISSEN BY..
TO WERER/P Sanon A
18
30
PER
-
ACTION
WH/COGP
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
(When Sugo (n)
P
ALPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROHIBITED
NOTIFICATION TO
TOTAL COPIES
A
T
23
ROUTING AND/OR
INITIALS - SCEN GY
2
7
13
8
ADV. COPY
☑
☐ ISSUED SLOTTED BY:
AT:
S
10
INFO.
✓ RID COPY
"VILE. VR WHB, C/ops, FI, FI/INT G
Hell
SECRET 242240Z CITE MEXICO CITY 2578
JMWAVE INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC AMSCROLL
24 Auc 67 IN 38580
IF AMSCROLL ECONOMIC INTELLIGENCE REPORT IS PUBLISHED IN
SPANISH AS WELL AS ENGLISH PLEASE SEND ONE ENGLISH COPY AND THREE
SPANISH COPIES OF EACH ISSUE TO MEXICO STATION IN FUTURE.
SECRET
BT
SECRET
AN (7)
WH/IC/CA
1/1/1A
ABSTRACT *
1
19-120-26
24 Aug 67

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_105.jpeg ---
14-00000
(
La Habana, Noviembre 29, 1966
Sr. Rafael Brevil
P.O.Box 3940
Miami, Fla.
Estimade amigo:
Hace unos dias recibí el libre que tuviste la
gentileza de remitirme, par le que te doy las
graciqs.
No obstante lo interesante que le encontré, te
agradeceré no me envies más ese tipo de lité-
ratura al Banco, pués puede perjudicarme.
Recibe afestes de tu amigo,
Cade
:
-2-
-
by
19-120-26
****
M
Santh

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_100.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM
TO
: Chief of Station
FROM
PW/RUBASH
SECRET
SUBJECT: TYPIC/OPERATIONALŲ
AMSTRUT-2
-
Progress Report
1 October - 31 December 1966
1
3 January 1966
WPH -
1276
Distribution
D16
T-COS
1 ->> PW/RUBASH
PW/Chrono
REG
1 ->
:
t
A. OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHT8
-
1. Om 9 October 1966 AMSTRUT-2 -poke in New York before
an audience of approximately 2600 persons on the occasion of
the anniversary of Cuban Independence (Grito de Yara). The
gathering was sponsored by AMICE. The audience response was
enthusiastic and the press services (AP, UPI, AFP) issued wire
releases on the AMSTRUT-2 statements which included a denuncia-
tion of Fidel CASTRO as a ‘hangman of his own people" and a
"lackey of international Commmunisa".
2. During October AMSTRUT-2 was interviewed by Henry
GOETHALS of the Copley News Service. The article resulting
from the interview was a sympathetic recounting of the AHSTRUT-2
activities on behalf of the cause of a free Cuba with specific
mention of the AMSTRUT-2 book which is in preparation and the
constant readiness of AMSTRUT-2 to travel, speak and work for the
cause.
3. During November the AESTRUT-2 Foundation made a contribu
tion of $464 for visa and medical costs involved in the travel of
a group of Cuban exiles from Jamaica to the United States.
4. The ANSTRUT-2 weekly radio spot on AMTHIGH continued with-
out schedule change during the quarter. Significant themes included:
comments on the degraded role of women in the Communist state compared
with that in the free world; reference to the myth of Communist unity
as revealed by the split between the ChiComs and the USSR; mention of
the possibility that Cubans will be sent to North Viet Nam to fight
and die; comment on the treatment of prisoners in Cuba and the UMAP
and editorial comment on the visit of Faul CASTRO and President
DOETICOS to Moscow with the statement that Fidel CASTRO did not go
because he did not dare lesve the island. This latter comment
inspired considerable press play locally as well as by the wire ser-
vices.
i
La
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_103.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
TO
INFO.
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/AMSCROLL
0
Possible Defection Lead
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PRO
POSED
PROCESSING
P
ACTION
XX MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
FEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
ACCOM
PLISHED
1
W-201
cct: Cube
potential
1. We enclose herewith a reproduction of a letter
dated Havana, 29 November 1966 that was received by
AMSCROLL. We beliews that the letter, signed "Carlos",
was written by Jose *BREVIL, Manager of the International
Department of the National Bank of Cuba. We say this
as in early November AMSCROLL mailed a copy of its newsletter Jantor
to BREVIL using as a return address the one used by the
writer of this letter; this combination of name and return
address was not used by AMSCROLL in its other mailings.
Station had obtained BREVIL's name and position in the
National Bank from a refugee debriefing report.
The
2. There are no Station traces of BREVIL. However,
the tone of the letter is friendly and it might therefore
be useful to index this information in the event that BREVIL
should travel abroad.
3. The Station examined the envelope for evidence of
tampering. None was found, though this is not conclusive.
I att
Attachment:
MICROFILMED
JAN 13 1967
for
DCC. MICRO, SEA.
As stated, hw
Distribution:
3-WH/C, w/att, hw
:
Roger & Marchton
Philip G. Elmard
19-120-26
19/3
is
19-126-26.
4 JAN 66
DATE DISPATCHED
JAN - 9 1967
DISPATCH SYMBGL AND NUMBER
DATE TYPED
CS COFY
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CLASSIFICATION
UFGA-26689
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_104.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
3
C
TRANSLATION
1
i
2
$
2*
MICROFILMED
JAN 13 1967
DOC. MICRO. SER
Havana, November 29, 1966.
Mr. Rafael Brevil
P.O. Box 3940
Miami, Fla.
Dear friend ·
Several days ago I received the book which you were so kird
as to send me, something I am thankful for.
Although finding it interesting, I would appreciate that you
stop sending me this type of literature to the Bank, since it might be
harmful to me.
Accept appreciation from your friend,
"Carlos
att. to UFGA-26689
CS COPY
-1-
=
19-120-26
+9-6-119/3
79-120-26
e tu plaka

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_102.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
SCOPET
- 3 -
}
;
21
D.
PLANS FOR NEXT QUARTER
10.
AMLYRIC-1 has been in negotiation with a group of
organizations at Harvard University which wish to sponsor an
AMSTRUT-2 appearance there. The tentative
The tentative plan at this writing
is for AMSTRUT-2 to appear during the first part of calendar
1967.
11. The ghost-written AMSTRUT-2 book on AMTHUG-1 should be
ready for first reading at least sometime during the next quarter.
12. It is planned to have AMSTRUT-2 prepare a rebuttal
(probably to be ghost-written by AMLYRIC-1) to the interview with
Fidel CASTRO which appeared in the January issue of Playboy maga-
zine.
13.
Further speaking engagements and tours by AMSTRUT-2 are
being planned for the next reporting period. It is also planned
that, with the official approval of the tax-exempt status of the
Foundation, an extensive fund raising campaign will be launched to
provide working capital and funding cover for operational activi-
ties as well as humanitarian and social welfare programs in conso-
nance with the AMSTRUT-2 Foundation charter.
vaynal
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_101.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
- 2
-
:
i
B.
ADMINISTRATION
5. During the second quarter of FY-67 there were expendi-
tures of approximately $19,000 by the AMSTRUT-2 activity. This
figure includes an estimate for the month of December because
the final figures have not been received at this writing. The
budgeted amount for AMSTRUT-2 for the quarter is $24,000 and there
is an excess of budget authorization over expenditures of approxi-
mately $5000. This figure, however, gives an unreal budgetary
picture of the AMSTRUT-2 activity. This $5000 will remain as a
part of the budget allotment and may well be expended in a flurry
of AMSTRUT-2 travel, publication activity and/or promotion during
the next quarter. In other words the excess does not represent
budget "fat" since the bulk of the AMSTRUT-2 expenses are not
figured as month to month constants but obligated as the operational
situation demands.
6.
During December AMSTRUT-2 moved into a smaller house with
a lower rent which will mean a saving of $100 per month. In
addition, it is anticipated that a further saving will be realized
in maintenance and upkeep costs.
☑
**
C.
PROBLEMS
--
7. The basic agent-handling problem presented by AMSTRUT-2's
mercurial disposition, excessive generosity and understandable
emotional approach to the role which must be played before the pub-
lic still exists. However, it seems to have lessened somewhat as
AMSTRUT-2 gains confidence in the language and in dealings with the
public. There is little question that a contributing factor to the
lessening of this problem is the reliance placed by AMSTRUT-2 on
AMLYRIC-1 who serves as business advisor, buffer and hand-holder.
8. The problem of projecting the image of the AMSTRUT-2 Founda-
tion as an independent charitable organization remains. The appli-
cation for tax exempt status to the state of registry is in the works
and when this application is approved it is likely that there will be
an increase of private donations which, because of the new status, will
be tax deductible. The problem lies in the dilatory behavior of the
state authorities.
9. AMSTRUT-2 continues to be attractive to certain extremist
political groups whose patriotic claims of objectives would often
appear to parallel those of AMSTRUT-2 and the Cuban exile community
as a whole, AMSTRUT-2 has not always been able to sort out the "good
guys” from the "bad guys" and the problem lies in fending off these
extremist groups and preventing them from exploiting AMSTRUT-2 for
partisan political ends.
?

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_106.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
+
L
=
T
1
TO
· DISPATCH
INFO.
FROM
Chief of Station, Athens
Chief, NE; Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECTTYPIC MHVIPER/AMSCROLL
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
POSED
☐ Letters Regarding Greek Shipping and Cuba
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
Action: FYI
CINE
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
INFADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICPOFILM
The economic research unit of AMSCROLL has throughout the past
year received seven anonymous letters from Athens. These letters
describe in detail Greek and Lebanese shipping with Cuba and appear
to have been written by someone knowledgeable of his subject. The
author apparently has access to AMSCROLL publications as he makes
reference to "your circulars". We forward a set of these letters
by separate cover as they may be of interest and of possible use.
The SCROLL shipping studies have made a veiled acknowledgment of
receipt of this material by referring to information received from
friends in Greece; however, AMSCROLL has used only those facts that
we can check out here. As indicated on certain of the letters,
copies of various ones have been sent to the "Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, Washington"; the U.S. Ambassador, London; or the U.S.
Ambassador, Athens. A copy of the last letter received by AMSCROLL was
sent all three.
Philip G. ELMARD
Distribution
2
-
-
2
-
COS/Athens w/att USC
C/NE w/o att ICC watt fund to NEAR/L & Icc w/ath fund to NEGTI/G
WH/C w/att USC at RI/AN.
Attachment
Letters
7
latt.
684 1
Excluded from Mumi.
Caclassification
19-120-26
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
CS COPY!
5 Jan 1967
JAN - 6 1967
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CLASSIC ALIN
SECRET
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-26699
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
4*141*12

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
INGEXT ☐ YES ☑"
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. 17-120-84 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
X-DEF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ BET. TO DRANCH ☑
DESTROY ☐ NG.
30
ACTION
#
WH/COGP
☐ TOTAL COPIES
+
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ☐ SLOTTE ☐ TE
FILE, VR With ADDI, CAZ CA/N:UP 1/162, Doy
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TIME
24 Auc 67 Bt 38564
SECRET 242133Z CITE WAVE 8963
STEADMAN ACTING
DIRECTOR INFO MEXICO CITY
All 177/20
WAC/LA
TYPIC MHVIPER LIETHIC
PS
ABSTRACT ✗SER
2549 (IN 36929)
REF MEXICO CITY 2549
1.
IN EVENT UPI DOES NOT PUBLISH REF STORY SUGGEST JMWAVE
REWORK THIS AND OTHER SUGAR INFO AVAILABLE HERE INTO NEW STORY
FOR SURFACING VIA AMSCROLL. WILL ATTRIBUTE TO AMSCROLL COMMERCIAL
SOURCES.
2. IF UPI STORY PUBLISHED STATION WILL PICK UP IN AMHIM
BULLETIN.
SECRET
BT
SECRET
19-1.20.26
24 Aug 67

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_110.jpeg ---
14-00000
5
3334
-2-
:
with private Charterers, not the Russians or Cubans, for the fixing of
his older tonnage, the Liberties? This takes place at a time that
Greek and possibly Lebanon Authorities are supposed to be prosecuting him
for his past sing. This is how much notice he takes of the Authorities.
Dozens of Masters, Officers etc., including Frangistas are supposed to
be in prison, to have paid huge fines, and to have lost their flags,
in accordance withe the povisions of the law. To our knowledge no one
has been imprisoned, no one has paid fines, no flag has been withdrawn,
and any time you want Frangistas do not look for him in his office. He
will not be there. He has no time for office, he is too busy with the
Authorities in Athens or Lebanon. Well, no one could ever imagine
that the USA Authorities would continue to betaken for a ride, and to
continue giving their aid to countries which use it against them. May
be this is the American Policy, who knows. The USA did in fact say
recently that unless Cuban trading is stopped, they would stop their aid.
Firstly is this enough, does it mean they do not mind for trading so
far, so long as further trading is stopped, which will clear up and
justify all Frangistas past sins? And secondly, we are certain, Frangi-
stas, will find the way, to continue trading. Who is to stop him. The
Americans obviously cannot the Greeks and Lebanese will not, therefore
the Show goes on. Which means CRIME DOES PAY, and stupid those who think
otherwise. As before, it is gretted that we have to write to you again
anonymously, and hope you forgive us. May be in your usual very informa-
tive circulars you can make your comments.
.
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_107.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1
Economic Research Bu.
Unidad Revolutionaria,
10 S.E. 9th Street,
MIAMI Fla. USA
CUBAN TRADING
Last week we wrote you few notes regarding illegal Cuban trading
also that the Greek Authorities no doubt through USA pressure (AT LAST),
are now investigating... names of ships and Owners who have been trading
with Cuba illegally since 1963. There is now quite a lot of propaganda
going on that these investigations will be expedited through the Harbour
Lasters in Greece, and Consular Authorities in ports outside Greece.
This news is of course to please USA, and to send to sleep those who
know nothing about the business, ordinary public opinion. As we said
before nothing much will be done, except some isolated, probably, cases,
mostly of small Owners, to just please USA etc., In fact, nothing will
be done, because the Creek Authorities will firstly have to punish
THEMSELVES before they can punish the Owners, Captains etc., mainly for
the following reasons:
I. The Greek Authorities know at all times where Greek ships are
trading, through their special Departments. They knew and
know where the ships were and are, and have never done anything.
about it.
2. If in any special cases they did not know themselves they
knew it through your circulars, also through the Black lists
issued by the USA Authorities.
* *
;
3
Many ships arrived or sailed or called for bunkers and
supplies through Greek ports for ports abroad with Greek
Consular Authorities attending), and obtained clearance papers
for Cuba or cleared having arrived from Cuba. Not a word was
said about it .
4. AND MOST IMPORTANT.
1474
Greek ships, by special law, pay Income Tax, nothing on profits
as other industries, but on each charter party voyage, whether
ordinary voyage or timecharter. They pay a percentage ranging
from 1 to 4 on the gross freight or hire, depending on the
age of the ship (excluding new ships up to five years old paying
nothing. Tax is payable in six monthly periods. When the Income
Tax Return is submitted to the Inland Revenue, Collector of
Taxes (under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance, the
following Documents are submitted and attached to the Returns.
A/. The CHARTER PARTY (properly certified)..
B/.
▾
Freight Statement showing exact details of freight
rate, tons of cargo carried under that charterparty,
and the total freight (gross) earned and upon which
the tax percentage is payable
•
C/ Sworn deposition of the Owners that all documents
submitted are correct abid true, again confirming
the gross earnings of the voyage, which voyage must
be explained in detail, port loaded, port discharged,
dates, duration etc.,
D/ MASTERS LOG BOCK, duly certified by the Harbour Master
or Greek Consular Authority, if vessel abroad at the
time, ( this under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of
Mercantile Marine),
19-120-26
S/Catt. 6 UFGA-26699
Fine CS COPY
It will be observed that in addition to all other sources of infora
ation, the Ministry of Finance (Inland Revenue), and the Ministry or

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_111.jpeg ---
14-00000
433
1
Ave
☐
:
:
Geonomic Research Burea
Vinidad Revolutionaria,
IO S.B. 9th Street,
Miami, Fla. U.S.A.
CUBAN TRADING
We expected by now some action from your end or from the American
Authorities to whom we had sent our previous copied communication to
you(Washington, Foreign Ministry, and U.S.A, Embassy, London), but regret
that, at least to our knowledgs, no action has been taken yet, and we
assume this by virtue of the fact that the ships we mentioned previously
just carry on the voyages for which have been fixed, and their Owners
openly negotiate further similar business from Cuba as most of the
trade to Cuba is presently done by Red flag ships. However, we supplement
our previous letter by giving you some additional information.
A. Some Merchants in Cuban Trading, but mainly D.'Enree, of Paris and Gene
fix vessels or large contracts, with a long list of options as to
where the cargo will/discharged, as often cargoes are shipped and not
sold until after shipment and sailing of the vessel from loading port.
These options start from Casablanca/Continent and continue into all
Mediterranean/2ed Sea/P.Gulf/India/Colombo/Malaya ports, sometimes as
Yar as Japan, freight rate depending at which port cargo is discharged,
and fihal orders are usually given seven days after sailing from Cuba.
As stated, the Lebanon Authorities costensibly allow Lebanon flag ships
to carry these cargoes to Arab Countries only, always subject to
license. Owners apply for such license for Arab countries, and then
"if the Merchant orders the ship to say Italy or Germany or Japan, the
ship just carries the cargo. Some Owners just do not apply for a license
at all, and the Lebanon Authorities know what goes on, but turns the
other way.
B Greek and Lebanon £lag ships just carry on trade in Cuba, and if you
say they do not, then either you do not know about it, or they must
camouflage their flags, or must fake ( as regards eventual destination)
their documents, such as charter parties, Bills of Lading, manifests
eto., Even the number of ships trading in Cuba given in your
circulars, is not correct it is much larger, may be you do this
intentionally for political reasons or maybe because you do not know.
S. Both the Greek and Lebanon Goverments are in a position, in accordance
with their famous laws, to stop immediately any ship to take the
flag away, and to impose upon the Owners very heavy fines and if the
· Owners do not pay the fines, then the ship will be immobilised since
the Government will refuse cancellation of registry certificate, meaning
that the ship cannot be put in a nother flag, and therefore, become
virtually non-existent. They can do lots of thigs, these Goverments,
but only if they want to and only if they want to apply their laws.
To our knowledge, and we can assure you, we arevery will informed, no
such thing has taken place, no ship has been stopped and no one has
beca fined, and maybe, and mostly likely, will never be.
-
Es Unilst Owners we mentioned in our previous letter continue business as
usual, and others, we notice with some surprise, that you are conti-
aucusly onpaining and mentioning the name of Travliris firm. Whereas
we naturally condemn and deplore this firm's continuation of this trade,
let us also be just and fair. This firm at least continues in a lawful
Hammer, since they are sending only ships with flags whose Goverments
permit such trading in an unrestricted manner. So this fim are not
awbreakers, whatever else they can be accused of. On the contrary,
you de not senton names of other Owners, who among other thigs are 19-176-26
also Law breakers and amongst them the biggest and most influential.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_108.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
Mercantile Marine, were specifically advised, on each occasion, upon
each voyage, by the Owners themselves, for the purpose of paying tax,
the Authorities having been, and being very strict, in ensuring that no
delay took place in submitting the Returns, and paying Tax. Anyone
can, therefore, see who is the first and biggest lawbreaker. Obviously,
the Greek Authoritas first and the Owners Keith second. As we said
previously, faboulous profits have been made by the lawbreakets-the
Ownerз(mostly the friends of officials, and mainly Frangitas clique)
but such profits were partly shared by the Govenment, through higher
tax vernentage. If there was no illegal Cuban trading really permitted,
these Greek ships would be employed in other trades, with small profits,
and less tex to pay. We really feel that the USA is to blink blans because
they were warned a very long time ago, alemost soon after the law breaking
hed commenced, and several times afterwards, and through you, but nothing
was done about it and allowed the comedy to continue. Officials almost
openly say here that the USA did not really think that trading stop
because the prohibitive law was passed in 1963 and that they knew that
the low was passed only for politics and not to to be enforced. Whether
this is true or not, onl" the USA know. It is also seid now
Authorities do not mind N07 starting enforcing the law, since Cuban
trade has been restricted through the low price obtainalbe for sugar
(about £14 per ton), and the economic difficulties of Cuba, thus also
restricting imports into Cuba. Meantime of course millions and millions
of dollars have been made from past trading, and for partly present
trading, which enabled their chief partner and collaborators FRANGISTAS
clique to build a vast empire of ships, so not much harm can be done
even if they stop it now. There is no doubt, the USA have been very
unfair and unjust to law abiding citizens. The USA should either have
demanded that both Greece and Lebanon. (who made the las in return. no
doubt of USA help to these countries) comply with their Agrement with
the USA and enforce the prohibitive laws of their respective countries,
or relieve them of the obligation and cancelling the laws, so that all
Greek and Lebanon Owners had the same chance of trading. USA's attitude
in doing nothing about it, really makes them as guilty as the other
two countries. You will find we are sure, that all the information
we gave you in our previous and several reports, was correct and
the Greek
6 substantiated. All we have to say now is that any charters which alledgedly
are still valid because they were made before the prohibitive laws are
as fake
as the investigations and punishments the Greek Officials are
supposed to be making against the law breakers. You will see how true
also these will prove to be unless the USA, if they want to, really
investigate themselves the investigators, with all the precise details
we have given you in past reports, and the present. We repeat, if nothing
else, the USA owe it to the lawabiding Owners, to investigate the matter
themselves, with their officials, and top men (including the examination:
of all Incone Tax Returns as we said above), and see to it that law
breakers, all of them small and big, are punished, and flags withdrawn,
and all further trading is stopped immediately. It will, generally, do ..
the USA good, if they were to prove to the world, people and Govenments,
even their friends and Allies, that the USA sees to it that agreements
made with them must be kept and that they allow no doublecrossing and
deceit.
salačné nášivanñan tu....
mad-
cc Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Washington.
U.S.A. Embassy ; London.
;.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_112.jpeg ---
14-00000
+4
443
71
3
77174-195
2
Is Frangistas, of Lisbon and Athens, represented by Purvis, London, having
at his disposal some 35 Greek and Lebanon flag ships, trading mostly in
Cyna. Frangistas is also the sole importer of Russian timber into Greece,
a huge trade. Also this same firm made an agreement with the Soviet Union
few months ago and by virtue of this Agreement, the Soviet Union has
commenced building for his fleet cargo ships bulk carriers, tankers,
and deepsea fishing Trawlers, at present worth $ 150.000.000, against
Greek products, and some of these ships ( Greek flag) will find their
way to Cuba, we are almost sure.
E.Meanting some of the existing Greek and Lebanon flag Cuban traders were
purchased with loans, through their Governments, and these Covernments
in turn received and receive help from the U.3.A. so in a vicious circle,
some of the American money has gone for the purchase of ships to help
○ trade with Castro's Cuba, whilst millions of American money is spent to
stop this trade. What a world we live in.
?.It must be very obvious to you that many people, watchful people, intelli-
gent and influential know what goes on, and will continue to watch
things until, it is noped
it is noped this mockery is stopped. It is also obvious
that somewhere in one or more places, bribery and corruption are taking
place, otherwise this state of affairs could not have started and cannot
continue. We do not wish to believe that the American Authorities do
not know what goes. If Greek and Lebanon officials are bribed to close
their eyes, O.K. but who stops the American Authorities to box the sars" `
of the Greek and Lebanon Authorities for allowing this stituition
to continue, and in so doing, they breaking firstly the laws of their
respective Countries, and breaking whatever agreement they have with
the U.S.A. Government, and, what is more, with the American Taxpayers
money.
.
1. We do not intend continuing these letters, we think we have said enough
and that we have given you and American Authorities sufficient information
which can be checked and verified. What we now want is results, namely,
complete and instant stoppage of all Greek and Lebanon flag ships
trading with Cuba, otherwise you will find that one affer another many
1 other Owners, small and large companies will re-enter, or enter Cuban
trading with Greek and Leben flag ships, and no one should dare to
condemn them. Also, do not forget that there are plenty of Companies
which do not trade with U.S.A. anyway, therefore blacklisting is not of
any importance.
"
Apologies again for the ananymity of this letter, and trust our
reasons for it will be appreciated, especially when our facts are checked
and found correct.
0.0
Ministry Foreign Affairs, Washington.
U.S.A. Embassy, London.
3
i
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_113.jpeg ---
14-00000
27
American Merchant Marine Institute, Inc.
919 18th Street, N. W.
Washington, D. C. 200C6
Alvin ShaPIRO
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT
WIRKA
TITUTE
296-4450
EARLE C. CLEMENTS
WASHINGTON CONSULTANT
December 1, 1965
Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vasquez
Secretary for Economic and
Professional Affairs
Movimiento Unidad Revolucionaria
10 SE 9 Street
Miami, Florida
Dear Dr. Rivas-Vasquez:
In response to your letter of November 19th, concerning
Greek and Lebanese shipping to Red Cuba ports, I am enclosing
some information I have obtained which should fulfill your
requirements. In the case of the Lebanese Directives, you
will note that no specific reference is made to shipping to
Cuba.
Despite the fact that the enclosed information is not
classified or restricted, it was obtained from a sensitive
source and I would appreciate it if you would handle this
matter discreetly.
We have been very pleased with the information your
organization has been providing us concerning shipments to
Cuba.
I hope that the data provided will be helpful to you.
Very sincerely yours,
-
Stusted & Sychlinski
Chester JSzychlinski
Director of Research
Attachment
:
:
F

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_109.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
t
"
.
Economic Research Bureau.
Unidad Revolutionaria,
10 S.E. 9th Street,
Miami, Fla. Usa.
CUBAN TRADING
Last year we gave you information and full details of vessels under
GREEK and LEBANON flags which continued, and still CONTINUE trading
with Cuba, the biggest and most influential of them being FRANGISTAS,
trading under both flags. We told you last year that we did not think
Frangistas would stop trading. He has not. Only recently when a group
of loyal and lawful Greek Owners took the matter to Greek Parliament,
the U.S.A. Authorities appeared to wake up and demanded that the Minister
of Foreign Affairs should ask the Minister of Mercantile Marine, to
produce a list of Owners still trading with Cuba. How come that a Greek
Minister of Mercantile Marine should have a list, a very long list, of
Greek ships still trading with Cuba, and yet he had done nothing about
to stop the illegal trading, in contravention of his laws. Few months
ago, few small Owners, the small fish of course, were asked to show where
their ships had been trading, knowing of course they had been trading with
Cuba. The local Courts were still " making enquiries". Nothing was done
naturally about Frangistas, whosh is responsible for about 90% of the
whole movements. How can he be prosecuted by his partners, since it
is more than obvious and clear that whatever he does has the blessing of
the Authorities, both in Greece and in Lebanon.
and in Lebanon. Frangistas has been
openly boasting, and he has proved his point, that the laws of Greece and
Lebanon, only apply to ordinary individuals, not to HIM. We do not know
what the Minister's list is, but we shall not be surprised if that list
contains only a fraction of his movements, and he will no doubt say that
he has not fixed any ship at all since the law was passed in 1963 but that
his contract was signed before the law. Of course he will. Any contact
can be faked and back-dated, with the connivance of the Charterers.
The only contract Frangitas had was with the Russians and the Russians
never make contracts for more than one year. He has signed severl
contracts with the Russians since 1963. But let us forget about the
Russians for a moment. Did he also have MANY years contracts with
the Poles, with the Hungarians, the Chechoslovakians, Boulgarians,
the Germans, the Chinese, the Syrians, the French, the Dutch, all
Scandinavians etc All the sugar in the World, and hundreds of ships
would not be enth to cover these, had there been contracts. No, all
his cargoes to Cuba and from Cuba (with possibly few cargoes with the
Russians carried latest few months after the law) were contracted after
the law, and were fixed in the open markets a cargo or two or three at a
time, either direct withthe countries concerned or via London, and his
ships have appeared in Freight lists on the day they were fixei, in
competition with other Owners and flags. If you or the USA Authorities
were to appoint a reputable Chartering Broker in London, he would tell
you exactly upon which date, what quantity, what destination. what rate
of freight, each cargo was contracted. Why do not you ask the Greek and
Lebanon Authorities to demand that h priduces a list of his 36 vessels
with all their logbooks, the charter parties, the timesheets, the #freight
statements, and banking receipts and let all these be examined by the
London Broker, not the Greek or Lebanon Authorities who cover his
illegal trading. And what about the Cubeas. Did Frangistas also have
very long contracts with the Cubans, signed before the law in 1963, and
are still valid and unexpired? Is this why Frangistas was in Havana at
at end of last year, and again beginning of this year, when he fixed six
liberties on timecharter for 9) 12 months, commencing early in
1966 and did he also fix the EFTHYCHIA for three years timechurter with
the Cubans, during his visit in Havana as stated above, before the law
was passed in 1963, bearing in mind that the vessel was built by the
Russians at the end of 1965? Do you know that Frangistas is till
nego-
tiating with the Cubans, and Russians for the fixing of the 35 further
ships the Russians will be building for him. Do you know that next
January, the new sugar season starts, and that he already is in touch
,
Despanca unui capelli Strai
desi waliomed an
144
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_115.jpeg ---
14-00000
M
:
:
.
-2-
-
their agreement with the USA. Really it is the Authorities which deserve
a bigger punishment. If the USA takes the suggested action, it will serve
two purposes. One is that the question of Cuba will be settled and the
other and probably more important, is that other Countries which also
receive aid from USA will take notice and appreciate that same thing
may happen to them if they, sone way or another, play the same games
as Greece and Lebanon. The USA if it is results that they want and not
talk and excuses
must ACT first and TALK afterwards. When this is
done, the Authorities will trace in no time at all all the lawbreakers,
will prosecute and punish them, and will stop at once all further trading.
Simply because they already know all lawbreakers, andAthey have all the
powers to punish them, but will not do so until it hurts and it is
going to hurt a lot if the Aids were stopped.
-
c.c. Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Washington.
U.S.A. Embassy, London.
10 4 64

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_116.jpeg ---
14-00000
14
NaFTILIA EXPRESS
Saturday 5-11-66
SCH TPOΣOXH
Пcountunoutai eis Thu OOGÓNU
©Ì ŒUV¤ÀÀ¤ŒGÓμEVOI NETÙ THS HoÛßes
Tñs Koúẞas
AI ANAKPIZEIZ ENIΣNEYAONTAI HAH
APAПEMONTAI Elc my Eloayyɛ-
n
Alav ПɛipaiñG DI MAOIOKTÑtai kal oi
rolap xoi TÙY CANVIET RÀOGY TÔI Ở
Tò YEN Sitrake rȧç mpo§evixás Kai AHEV-
xác áp xác ÔNG BỊ CHO LÚC CON Tin Burarn
averpiasev sở có thoa và ôngia Star POUY
Nauvallayas per the Koubaç. Ai
tva bikoуpasial ȧ áno
siç th Eigayychiar Nɛipside ǹ ôncía kai Bà
'H oúvbɛoIC
noia пpocɛvvičov ɛię Koubav. 'Eni-
пpooßétwę, oi nhoiɑpxoi napanéjnov.
tai kai ɛiç tò Nɛiŝapxikóv LuµboúÀiov.
mapaníuyŋ ánádas rás únobiotię švánioV TOU
Tpiuzhous nano₁ciou.
Al mpoбkímóµtial moivai ziva, quláktorę µÅ-
xpic 6 µŋvár, bɩ° cháotŋs mapábaðiv kai xpn-
PATIK TOIV dià di roús miάproυç kai ori-
pŋaię tės ċnayyzipatikėę áðziaç péxp. 2 éráv.
´O OAII napćöwσɛ
tǹv пæpioxǹv
FOT
'Annp
409 En
HEAŵV
puμouλ
'Empayμ
Epyia Tur
KÙY YOU Ànge
412 T
Yeaν τà 40.
To YEN
BrystonpyyheisY, *
2pm Bin 24
; m
A map
{ "Es; Have
Jam Bampi
lyda "Hamogızia ·
2:26.
'Ev th pit.
Ý
7:55 1!,
uitz.
EKAO
h
19-120-26
14763.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
->
:
INDRE ☐ YES ☐ NO.
NO _
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO
I REF TO FILE NO
FILE RID ☐ RET. 10.
DESTROY
SIG.
DISSEN BY-
30
ACTION
[BRANCH U
CLASSIFIED PESCAGE
SECRET
(When filled (n)
TOTAL
PEPRODUCTION OF THIS COPS PROHIB
NOTIFICATION TO E
ADV. COPY
I
☐ ISSUED ☐ SLOTTED BY:
J
FILE. VR WH8, C/OPS
INFO:
WH/COGE
☑ RID COPY
ROUTING AN
HINTS TIGS BY
MO
RS
ps.
BT
1
•FI₁
AT:
RS
ESEC
4/005
Pro
24 AUG 67 IN 38580
PP
SECRET 242240Z CITE MEXICO CITY 2578
JMWAVE INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC AMSCROLL
IF AMSCROLL ECONOMIC INTELLIGENCE REPORT IS PUBLISHED IN
SPANISH AS WELL AS ENGLISH PLEASE SEND ONE ENGLISH COPY AND THREE
SPANISH COPIES OF EACH ISSUE TO MEXICO STATION IN FUTURE.
SECRET
BT
i
1
T
+
i
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_118.jpeg ---
14-00000
7.47
+
*
$
f
2
next few weeks, the so far law abiding Owners of Creek and Lebanon flag
vessels, will also re-commence or start trading to Cuba, for the simple
reason that they will feel that they are breaking no laws, since they
who asked the Governments of Greece and Lebanon to pass the laws, do
not mind if they are not complied with. It remains, however a great
mystery, because we cannot beleve that the American Authorities do not
know about this trading and why they have not protested to the Lebanon
and Greek Governments, and if they do not know, then there is something
very drastically wrong with their Intelligence.
Anonymous letters are not good things, in fact quite deplorable, but
we trust you will understand the reason for anonymity in this case, and
since you will no doubt like to know who wrote it, wecan tell you is
written on behalf of some people who are very bitter and disappointed
that their compliance with the law puts them in disadvantage, especially
if it is proved that to comply with the law does not pay. we have
given you sufficient information to check facts immediately and stop
all the wrong doers. If they are not stopped, then your circulars will
have to incrase, in the very near future; the number of Greck and Lebano
ships trading with Cuba.
$7
'
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_119.jpeg ---
14-00000
CUBAN TRADING
18th Nov. 1966
The Economic Research Bureau,
Uniaad Revolutionaria,
10, 8.2. 9th Street
Miami, Fla.
Ush
:
tapi vej manja sak you
:
On the 16th instant we wrote you about the Castro Delegation which
arrived in "thens recently to conclude new chartering contracts. ife
can now report that, the Delegation consisted of,:
Mr. Hernandez, Chief General Manager of CUFLET, Havana.
Mr. Fornaguera, Chartering Dept. Cuflet, Havana, and that.
these two gentlemen arrived here at the invitation, and.
as guests of FRANGISTAS with whom they remained during
their Athens stay. Faking of previous contracts discussed,
new contracts negotiated and concluded, both for cargoes
to Cuba, and sugar from Cuba for not onit next year, but
for longer periods, covering liberties and ships being
built in Russia, and to be built, all new ships are and
will be under Greek Flag, older vessels are either Greek or
Lebanon. After Athens they went to Moscow where they covere
that side of the business, and now they are in London,
having further talks with Frangistas London partners
PURVIS SHIPPING CO.
Mr. Fornaguera, was until early this year, the manager of
CUFLET, London! for three years) and is now again in
davana's office. Both men are returning to avana shortly.
when the Delegation asked Frangistas about the steps presently
taken by the Greek Government in investigating( ???) ships which have
been trading with Cuba since 1963, and prohibition of further trading,
Frangistas assured them they have nothing to worry about, the prohibi-
tion is a fake, so are the investigations and threatened punishment. de
also reminded them that these investigations took place before, but all
their cargoes were carried just the same, and numerous charters were
fixed at various intervals by Frangistas through them, through Russia,
and through many private charterers. He also assured them that whatever
he does is done with the full knowledge of the Ministries, and particulalry
his special partners, high officials.
Most of previous information in our reports, and the information
contained in this report obtained direct, confidentially, from Brangistes
own Athens Office. If you, or USA Government have any wish to check up,it
is very easy, and simple, if you or USA do not care to check now, then
you will see the accuracy of the report as time goes on. die are more than
certain you are satisfied that all our previous reports proved accurate
and were substetiated. We have to confess that we are now beginning to
believe that even you and USA muthorities know all facts and truth and
eitner do not care or cannot do anything about it. There is no other
logical explanation. Except that Us who are fighting Communists and
Dictators in the name of vemocracy and freedom, it is this same USA who
are creating a pictator in the name of Frangistas, whom it is the USA who
help him create vaste fleets ( rumours have it that shortly Frangistas
is going to Hoscow to place further building contracts)
further building contracts), at the expense
•
of democratic Greek Owners, who were compelled to either scrap and lay up'
their ships(many have done this) rather then go to Cuba, at the request
Trα.
:
t
"
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_114.jpeg ---
14-00000
CUBAN TRADING
:
5 Nov
I
#
...A.
Économic Research Bureau,
Unidad Revolutionaria,
IO, S. E. 9th Street,
Miami iln. USA.
He wrote you few days ago about the illegal cuban trading and we now
enclose herewith cutting from todays, 5th November 1965, Piraeus Newspaper
* NAFTILIA EXPRESS " from which you will observe that action is now being
taken ( three years too late and after millions of tons of cargo has been
carried to and from Cuba) against Owners, Captains etc., of Greek ships.
The Greek Ministry of Hercantile Marine are also instructing port Autho-
rities to enquire and investigate which ships traded with Cuba since 1963.
You see until now or even now, the Ministry did not know... and now
they will try to find out. No doubt owing to some half hearted pressure by
the USA Authorities, the Greek Authorities are at last compelled to at
least show that they are trying to find out now which ships traded,
also no doubt they will find some ships which traded and will prosecute
the Captains and the Owners, and perhaps carry out some sort of punishment
and naturally it will be the small and unimportant Owners they will trace.
The big and influential will not even be traced. If one has to be traced,
like Frangistas, they will find all necessary excuses and reasons for
not prosecuting. The job for enquiring, prosecuting, and punishing the
offenders is left with those with whose connivance and knowledge trading
continued since 1953, and still continues, so anyone can imagine, what
kind of a job they will do. We wonder why no enquiries were made during
1963, 1964, 1965. Simply because enquiries were not necessary. You dɔ
not enquire about something you already know. The latest excuse of Fran-
gistas, as we think you already know, comes through his brother, who is
a Professor in Salonica University, that the law prohibiting Cuban trading
was Unconstitutional. This joke was as good as any, even better than the
one about his false or fake contracts and charter parties. His other brother
who is the real influence with the Russians and is a timber merchant having
the monopoly of mall Russian timber imports into Greece and some fruits
from Greede to Russia, is the one who helped to secure the building in
Russia of some 35 large liners and bulk carriers plus a huge fish trawling
fleet, in exchange for Greek products, and part payment in cash from the
vast profits they made out of their 35 second hand liberty vessels in
Cuban trading. Even in this respect, do not forget that this privilege
of building these fleets( and we understand further building contracts
are cooking) was only given to the Frangistas clique by the Greek and
Russian Authorities, and not to any other Greek Owner. Do the USA Authori-
ties really think that the Greek Authorities ( and in a smaller degree
the Lebanon Authorities) will prosecute Frangistas, and even if they do,
for eyewash they will find him guilty? You will see that nothing will
happen. What we now have to say, as the only solution, may seem unpatriotic,
but it is the only way to stop this rot. This is that the USA should dis-
continue immediately and without any notice, all Military and Financial
Aid to Greece and Lebanon, with intimation to them, that they will
consider renewing same, as soon as firstly ALL trading with Cuba is stopped
immediately disregarding any so called old contracts, and secondly AFTER
they have prosecuted and punished peroperly all lawbreakers, small and
big ones alike, and after all flags have been cancelled. This second action
is a big debt the USA Authorities owe to all the Greek and Lebanon Owners
who complied withe laws of their countries and executed the wishes of the
USA. It is a moral debt. These people will gain nothing because they
do not ask for any money for all fortunes they lost in not trading with
Cuba, but the Uon, as a country known as just and democratic, will have
failed in their duty if they are coment to just see discontinuation of
further trading with: Cuba and no punishment for the past sinners. And
talking of sins, we think that the Greek and Lebanon Authorities committed
and still commit a bigger sin than the Owners, since the Owners are simply
out for high profits, but it is the Authorities who broke their word ard
,
•
-
Takakianzia Khandekade vatte

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_120.jpeg ---
14-00000
Expy 7 HC
!
CUBAN TRADING
2nd December 1966.
The Economic Research Bureau,
Unidad Revolutionaria,
IO S.E. 9th Street,
Miami, Fia. USA.
Enclosed you will find cutting from yesterday's
,
NAFTIKA CHRONIKA which is the most influential and largest
Magazine in Greece on maritime affairs. We trust you will
find same interesting.
FRANGISTAS clique meantime carry on the illegal Cuban
trading, and negotiate further contracts, which the Greek
Authorities are all out to punish Frangistas for his past sins.
AND the U.S.A. just looks on. It is becoming obvious both
USA, and Greece do not want Greek ships to carry on trade with
Cuba, unless same is done by Frangistas, their hero.
C.O.
U.S.A, Ambassador, Athens,
U.S.Ambassador, Landon.
Ministry for Foreign Affatis, Washington
. D-
**
-:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_121.jpeg ---
14-00000
45
1
15
*
1
J
CLASSIFICATION
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET
UFGA-26348
reporting and its wealth of data and figures. AMFOUND-1 added that,
he is quite certain that these reports had been forwarded to the home
office in PBRUMEN, although he could not personally vouch for this.
The Station is happy to have this indication that AMFOUND-1's former
office continues to receive this publication; AMSNAKE-1 had reported
shortly after his arrival here that he had read the first issue of
this series prior to his defection.
t
Roy Mulband
PHILIP G. ELMARD
_ _
CLASSIFICATION
PAGE NO
FORM
53a
LIKE PREVIOUS EDITION.
*

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_117.jpeg ---
14-00000
Economic Research Bureau,
Unidad Revoluciona
IO S.E. 9th Stree.,
Miami, Fla. U.S.A.
i
Rai 18 Nov. Es
Nov. Es
51
CUBAN TRADING
Your circulars regarding Cuban affairs and trading contain useful
information but it seems that neither you nor the American Authorities
are well informed. You know that, through American pressure, the Greek
Government banned, several years ago, all trading with Cuba for Greek flag
vessels, except few which were on timecharter and were allowed to run
their charters, which finished a very long time ago. Similarly, the Lebanɔ
Government banned all trading with Cuba for Lebanon vessels, few months
ago, and only allow, subject special licence, their ships to carry goods
from and and to countries of the Arab League. Both countries passed laws
to this effect, and both state that infringement of the law carries very
heavy fines against the Owners and Masters, and withdrawal of the flag.
That is what the laws say, but what is actually happening is another
matter. Greek and Lebanon flag vessels have continued, since banning,
to be fixed, have carried and are carrying cargoes, through a number of
Owners, such as Frankistas( Franco Shipping Co. of Lisbon and Athens,
per Purvis Shipping Co. London, their U.K. Agents), blink owning about
35 Greek and Lebanon flag Liberties and similar vessels, also Vlassopoulo,
Livanos, etc., also owning a great number of ships with these flags.
They simply say they do not care a dann about the ban, and continue to
making fortunes in the Cuban trading, the reason being that as most
other law abiding Owners with these flags do not go to Cuba, the market
remains wide open for these people. They do not even try to hide, they
just fix their ships, mostly in the Baltic Exchange, London, and Athens,
but also direct with Charterers in Poland, Hungary, Boulrgaria,
Russia, etc. and with Paris, and Geneve. The Governments of Greece and
Lebanon, who made the laws, just look on, doing nothing about it, and
this means that the laws were made, for paper value only. Some of these
Owners fix their ships by name and flag, others just fix a contract
to be carried by ships, to be nominated later, and later they nominate
greek and Lebanon ships. Only the last few days, the following were fixed
on the London market: Frankistas, 50.000 tons sugar from Cuba to England
for sugar Merchants Tate and Lyle, London, to be carried in 2 or 3 months,
and Frankistas has already nominated the NICOLAOS F.(Greek flag) and
San Spyridon (Lebanon flag), for 20.000 tons and the remaining 30.000
tons are being nominated also for Creek and Lebanon flag ships. The same
Owner just also fixed one cargo for Halmo (Sweden), and one to Gdynia,
Poland. He is presently negotiating several other cargoes, for his
large Greek and lebanon flag ships, with the aforementioned concerns,
including another contract with D' Enree of Paris, via Geneve.
The
AIS GIANNIS (Lebanon) was fixed with Dreyfus, London, few days
ago, to carry a cargo of beans from Vera Cruz and Tampico to Cuba, and
after for sugar to Europe. Another concern trading with Cuba is
Tsavliris of London and Athens, but this firm is not trading with Greek
Lebanon flag ships.
The World thinks that you and American Athorities know all that goes on
in Cuba. If so, it means that neither you nor American Authorities know
and do not mind such trading with Greek and Lebano ships if they know.
We have given you some details of the latest fixtures. You and American
Authorities can check up without any thouble and when they verify the
correctness, they will no doubt protest immediately to the respective
Goverments, ask them to stop immediately the carriage of these cargoes
and punish their Owners etc., as per their laws, and demand log books,
freight accounts, etc to verify all past trading, a tremendous one. If
they bay or you, do not do anything out it, it will mean that both
you and American Government knew and know about this illegal trading and
do not mind, in which case, we can more than assure you, that within the
:
Y
mit besin the kam nuk m
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_127.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
=
6
¡fected.
22 dairies were partially affected, and 9 ware deg
troyed.
Several goat-barns were damaged.
2 poultry yards were damaged.
In Buey Arriba, Regional' Cauto-Bayamo-Jiguant
30,000 steers were seriously affected.
TRANSPORTATICH
Pinar del Río Province: None.
Havana Province:
Matanzas Province:
Las Villas Province:
Camguay Province
Oriente Province
Several portions of the highways running parallel
to the railway had been washed away.
None.
None.
None.
In 'Regional' Palma-San Luis, 3 bridges were dam-
áged.
The railways bridge at Central Los Reinaldo, Alto
Songo is unpassable.
From Santiago de Cuba to Camaguey, railways were
damaged.
NON-SPECIFIED INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES
Pinar del Río Province: None.
Havana Province:
Matanzas Province:
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province'.
The "fico López" refinery (ferner Esso-Belot), was
seriously affected, when the line of 110,000 volts
went down.
Outside of the Capital there was a two day power
failure..
None.
In El Mégano, 6 workshops were damaged,
Hone:
In 'Regional' Quantánamo 1 food store was destroy-
ed.
In 'Regional' Guantánamo, 7 workshops ware damaged,
OTHERS
Pinar del Río Province: In 'Regional' Pinar del Río, 14,800 houses were
i
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_122.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
economic intelligence report
FROM THE UR. ECONOMIC RESEARCH BUREAU
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
+
A
SC Att.
VEGA 26205
OFFICE:
10.S.E. 9 St.
MAILING ADDRESS
Miami, Florid
PHONE™
273 - 0033
VOL. II"
"
SC Att. #1 UFGA=26348
SPECIAL REPORT ON HURRICANE INEZ' EFFECTS ON CUBAN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION,
SUGAR
Evaluation:
The ERB estimates that Cuba will lose a total of 307,000 metric tons of
sugar in its 1967 harvest as a result of hurricane Ines.
5
Greatest damage was done to the caña quedada, the uncut eane left over from
the previous year.
When Ines struck the ERB estimates that there were about
four million tons of caña quedada which should produce about 500,000 tons of
rau sugar assuming a saccharose yield of 12.65. The ERB arrives at this loss
figure due the fact that fully 80%, or 3,200,000 tons., of the cafa quedada was
in the southern and central parts of tas Villas Province and the southern part
of Oriente Province which is where Inez hit Cuba with its greatest force. In Cy
ba any hurricane usually destroys about 85% of the caña quedada that is hit,
Thus the ERB estimates that Ines destroyed 1,360,000 tons This will amount to
a sugar loss of 171,000 tons, using the 12.6 saccharose yield figure.
The balance of the sugar loss will come from the damage to the ratoon cana,
the cane that sprouts again after having been cut. The ERB estimates a total
of 16,400,000 tons. of Eaton in Las Villas and Oriente provinces. The ERB's
studies show that Ines struck 33% of this cane, or 5,400,000 tons. Historical-
ly, a conservative estimate of past damage to ratoon cane that is struck by hur
ricanes in Cuba would be 20%. Using this, Cuba's loss would be about 1,080,000
tons. Again, using the 12.6% saccharose yield figure, the raw sugar loss from
the ratoon cane amounts to about 136,000 tuns.
Available Information:
Pinar del Río Province:
In 'Regional' Artemisa, 42 'caballerías' (state-
owned) of sugar cane were damaged and 900,000 *ar-
robas* (*) of sugar cane, were also damaged.
200 sugar bags of "Eduardo García Lavandero" sugar
mill, were damaged, specially from the rains.
50% of sugar cane areas, went down on account of
the winds.
In 'Regional' Costa Norte, they reported serious
damage in the sugar canes.
(*) 'arroba' equals to 25 pounds.
slear
AM LUFGA-26348
CS COPY
19-120-26
3 +
t
1
1
:
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_124.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
J
:
3.-
Matanzas Provincet
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province:
None.
Tobacco production was destroyed,
Almost total loss of the tobacco crop.
5,000 houses of "curar tabaco" were destroyed in
the following localities: Cabalguáñ, Zaza del Ma-
dio, Placetas, Cama juani, and Sancti-Spiritus.
93 houses full of tobacco (casas de tabaco), were
destroyed, and 350 were partially destroyed.
7 houses of "curar tabaco" were partially destroy-
ed in El Mégano and 9 were completely destroyed,
another 31 houses suffered minor damages.
None.
None.
COFFEE
Commentary
The hurricanes during September and October cause considerable damage; to
the coffee crop, because it is precisely during these two months when the cof-
fee is harvested. Besides the damage to the coffee plants, the hurricane scat-
ters the coffee beans which rot quickly in contact with the wet soil.
Pinar del Río Province: None.
Havana Province:
Matanzas Province:
None.
None.
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province:
Coffee production was destroyed.
Almost total loss of coffee crop.
None,
The ANAP (National Association of Small Farmers).
called all the members of this association to pick
up all the coffee crop that was seriously damaged,
Until October 1st., in Buey Arriba and Guisa,
472,000 full-cans of coffee were collected, that
represents a 27% of the actual crop, that was cal-
culated in 1,740,000 full-cans. They are sending
workers of Jiguani, Santa Rita and Cauto Cris-
to to Buey Arriba coffee plantantion.
In 'Regional' Baracoa. the hurricane Ines ripped
the coffee crop.
Ir. 'Regional' Guantánamo 13,000 full-cans suffered
serious damages.
In 'Regional' Palma-San Luis 122,000 full-cans
went to the ground.
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_123.jpeg ---
14-00000
Havana Province:
Matanzas Provincet
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province?
Oriente Provinces.
-None.
Sugar cane in Roque was heavily damaged.
15
About 50% of the sugar cane was leveled, part of
this will have yield while other will dry up
from root damage.
Sugar cane in Valle de Trinidad, crop damaged.
'Regional Sancti-Spiritus: Serious damages to the
sugar crop.
Tunas de Zaza: gap in a sugar warehouse, but it
was empty.
El Végano: 90% of the sugar cane was damaged (800
!caballerías (*) crushed).
In Baraguá, Venezuela, San Dimas, Majagua, 'Rögio-
nal Ciego de Avila, the sugar cane suffered dam-
age from the winds.
Sugar cane suffered serious damages in the vicin
ity of Santiago.
Hear Yara, sugar cane fields were observed with
two feet of water.
In Boquerón 900 sugar bags were destroyed.
In Cairanera, Boquerón, Guantánamo, the sugar plan
tations suffered serious damages.
In 'Regional! Guantánamo 7 cane shelters were des-
troyed and 39 were affected,
In 'Regional' Palma-San Luis 500 'caballerías'
sugar cane, -vere destroyed.
The roofs were blown off from sugar warehouses #4 and #5 in Guantánamo and
the 2,500 bags of raw sugar stored therein became wet.
TOBACCO™
Commentary
Strong winds and heavy rains affect the quality of this plant, as long as
they damage the tobacco leaves. Besides this, the leaves get stained and some
rot as a result of being in contact with the wet soil, thus affecting the qual-
ity in one case, and becoming a total loss in the other. If the area is flo-
oded, most tobacco leaves will rot.
Pinar del Río Province:
Havana Province:
In 'Julián Alemany' farm in Consolación del Sur
and in "Hnos. Saiz" in San Juan y Martines, the
10% of the tobacco seeds. were damaged.
None,
(*) A 'caballería' is a Cuban surface measure equal to: 33.162 acres,
31

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_126.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
:
Matanzas Province:
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province:
Malanga fiolds were covered with water which will
rot most of the plant root. Complete loss of corn
crops wore observed in the Malanga ar
area
'Viands' crops were destroyed
2% of the plantain, yucca and sweet potatoes crops
were destroyed..
In 'Mabay' 1,400 bags of sweet potatoes and 160
quintals of yucca were collected.
All vegetable crops in the vicinity of Santiago de
Cuba suffered serious damage.
BEANS AND RICE
Pinar del Río Province: 15 'caballerías of rice were damaged from the
wind and the heavy rains in 'Patricio Lumumba'
farm.
Havana Provincet
Matanzas Provincet
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province:
None.
None.
In the zone of Jatibonico to Sanoti-Spiritus, seri
ous damages in rice plantations.
In El Megano, 8 caballerías' of beans were dec-
troyed.
20% of beans crop were damaged.
Rice fields near Yara
ground.
had been leveled to the
CATTLE, POULTRY AND DAIRY
Pinar del Río Province: 56 calves dead.
Havana Provincet
None.
Matanzas Province:
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province:
None
"Numerous animals were drowned.
In El Mégano, 7 dairies were destroyed, and 19 suf
fered minor damages, and one was partially damaged.
None.
30 poultry shelters were destroyed, and 9 were af-
A
F

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_125.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
In the Yara region the coffee crop was 50% destroy
ed the coffee beans had been ready for harvest
and therefore easily shaken off by wind..
In Buoy Arriba, 'Regional' Cauto-Bayano-Jiguanf,
-500 women picked up about 10,000 full-cans of cof-
Pinar del Río Province'
Havana Province:
Matanzas Province'
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Provincet
Oriente Province:
FRUIT
In 'Guane-Mantua' 1,000 banana plants were dan-
aged.
In 'Regional' Pinar del Río 5,700 banana stubs
wore destroyed. In 'Regional' PR-2 the guava plan
tations were damaged by the winds.
None.
None.
In Valle de Trinidad, the banana plantations and
the fruit crop were completely destroyed.
In El Mégano 120,000 banana stubs were destroyed.
None.
was
Between the 80 and 90% of the fruit orop
destroyed. In 'Regional Baracoa 40,000 banana
stubs were destroyed.
In 'Regional Palma-San Luis 14 'caballerías'
banana were damaged.
In "Josué País" farm 30% of the 80 'caballeríasª
of banana were destroyed.
t
In Buey Arriba, 'Regional' Cauto-Bayamo-Jiguaní,
300 caballerías! of bananas were damaged, only 70.
were destroyed.
'
All fruit in the vicinity of Santiago de Cuba suf
fered serious damage.
__
Near Holguin banana plants were leveled by wind.
Near Yara, banana plants had been broken.
In 'Regional! Guantánamo 35 'caballerías' of coco
nut were destroyed.
-
VEGETABLES & "VIANDS"
Pinar del Río Province: None.
Havana Province:
In 'Regional' Ariguanabo, losts in the agriculture;
specially vegetables seed beds.
=

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_128.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
j
-
7
:
Havana Province:
Matanzas Province:
Las Villas Province:
Camaguey Province:
Oriente Province:
damaged, 3 warehouses were damaged in 'Regional'
PR-2.
Many houses were completely under water, crops and
farm land were flooded.
None.
2 warehouses of fertilizers were damaged in El Mé-
gano.
Júcaro, Quince y Medio and Central Venezuela, 'Re-
gional' Ciego de Avila, imundations and damages in
Venezuela sugar mill.
In 'Regional' Guantánamo 77 kms. offences were
destroyed, and 8 pastures were damaged. Other
damages caused by the rains were: 200 tons of hay
and several pigpens, plus 3 warehouses, 260 bags of
fertilizer, and 115 'quintales' (*) of cotton seeds
In 'Regional Palma-San Luis 60 houses were des-
troyed and 10 farm houses were also destroyed.
Heavy rains affected 67 tons of fertilizer.
(*) One "quintal" equals 100 lbs., or ¼ 'arrobas'.
Note: All other crops suffered the regular damage caused by a hurricane, i.e.,
broken branches, scattered fruits, plants destroyed, and the known damage
caused by heavy rains, strong winds, and flooding.
1
*

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_129.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
i
XX
X
t
1
1
EXPLANATICH OF MAP. - EXPLICACION DEL MAPA -
Sugar came
Caña de azúcar.
Pine-groves
-
Pineros,
GRICUL
GRICULTURAL PRODUCTS AND HOW
E AFFECTED BY HURRICANE "INEZ"
DUCTOS AGRICOLAS DE CUBA Y
LES AFECTO EL CICLON "INES"
CONOMIC RESEARCH BUREAU
OFFICE
10 S.E. 9.54.
Miami, Florida
Produce - Frutos Menores,
Coffee - Café.
Cattle – Gañado,
•
Tobacco Tahaco
Pananas Pistanos.
☐ Rice - Arroz.
Gitric & other fruits
'Cftrices v otras frutas.
Henequen fiber - Hene quến,
Pineapple - Piña.
Corn - Malze
★ 'Beans - Frijoles.
Potatoes • Pápas.
Cocoa - Cacao.
☐ Charcoal-Carbon vegetal.
Pork •
Ganado: Porcino.
+
+
44445
tur.
"
04
L
I
PATH OP HURRICANE "INEZ”
TRAYECTORIA DEL CICLON "INES
SOURCE, Cuban Official newspaper, Granma, Havana, Oct., A. 19
20
GOLFO
DE MEJICO
X X
LA FLONIA
**
:
52
L

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
CIYH
PROCESSING
ACTIN
ALCOM
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING BEQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESA
CAR JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
| PLISHED.
TO
IMFU
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Santiago
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
POSLO
Chief, Wostern llomisphere Division
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT DYVOUR/HILSPAWN
© ANSCROLL Material for Passage to Chiloan Foreign Office
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
References:
A.
B.
C.
SANTIAGO-4858
DIRECTOR-29260
JMWAVE-8917
1. Station JMWAVE forwards by separate cover material that we be-
lieve will be useful por paragraph 1.A. of reference A. Wo are forward-
ing only the basic material from which Santiago can make selections and
can re-work into any desired format. Included is a collection of AMSCROLL.
economic studies which heavily emphasizes and documents Cuban mismanage-
ment of its sugar industry-which of course is Cuba's principle source of
foreign currency. In addition, there are analyses of other foreign trade
problems such as the difficulties in obtaining adequate shipping, problems
with products other than sugar sent to Canada and Zurope for sale, as well
ass internal production and distribution difficulties. Also included are
the texts of statemonts to the press given by senior defectors from the
Cuban regime who were surfaced by the AMSCROLL organization. All of those
statements discuss, often in considerable detail, the economic problems
facing Cuba with which these individuals were personally knowledgeable.
Also included is a folder concerning studios of Free World shipping with
Cuba.
2. Though some of this material has been released to the press and
all of it provided to AMSCHOLL's mailing list of commercial, shipping,
and financial firms that are interested in or are dealing with Cuban com-
mercial organizations, it is accurate to say that this material has not
received widespread publicity and therefore we believe that it should be
helpful for your purposos. For the immediato future we will air mail
additional information of this kind to Santiago's overt mailing address
as such items come to our attention.
3. Santiago may or may not attribute these studies to ANSCROLL as
it wishes.
Roger E. MARCHBANK
G* 1
toms
0:
Attachments:
A/E/k, U/S/C
Distribution:
19-120 26
CS COPY
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
2
-
✓2
-
2
-
COS, Santiago, w/atts, U/8/C
C/WHD, w/o atte CROSS REFERENCE TO
WH/COG, w/o atts'
23 Aug 1967
2ccte WH/4/CH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DESPATCH BYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 28341
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
119-120-26/3
$

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_133.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
$
-11-
During the last months, the Cuban government has had difficulty in keeping
its vessels afloat. The M/V ARACELIO IGLESIAS suffered severo damages after
crashing into the Norwegian M/V NIDAREID in the Panama Canal last June. 11,
1965.
April 8, 1966, the M/V ORIENTE was sunk after colliding with the Norwe-
gian M/V ESTARFORT off the coast of Holland. And, on April 27, 1966, another
newly-built Spanish vessel, the M/V LA PLATA, while on a trip to Japan, was in-
volved in an accident, also in the Panama Canal, with the M/V HONG KONG AMBER
of Liberian registry.
The ERB might comment that comrade Rodríguez's remarks to the Hungarian
correspondent of problems affecting Cuban industry and agriculture might woll
have been applied to Cuban shipping as well.
Sources:
The above information has been obtained from reliable sources, both
from Cuba and the Free World. For additional details address your-
self toi
Economic Research Bureau
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
10 S.E. 9th Street
Miami, Fla. 33131, U.S.A.
Miami, Fla., October 27, 1966.-
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_132.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
4111
-
- 10 -
FRANCO SHIPPING CONTINUES IN THE CUBA SEA TRADE
Franco Shipping Company has been responsible for 18.1% of the total Free-
World sea trade with Communist Cuba for the January-September 1966 period.
The ERB denounced the operations of Franco Shipping Co. and its nine sub-
sidiaries in Greece and Great Britain in August 1966 (*) and now it wants to
stress that FRANCO SHIPPING has continued engaged in the Cuba trade as ERB's
statistics show?
Fo
January-Coptember 1966
Number of
Trips
t
Free World vessels
Franco Shipping vessels
177
32
100.0%
18.1% .
Note: Breakdown of Franco Shipping Co.'s vessels by registry:
a) Greek:
b) Lebanese:
c) 11,749 GRT Tanker
Sword under Italian
and Finnish flags :
d) ARETI under Cypriot
flag:
17.
Total:
32
(*) For full details see: Economic Intelligence Report Vol. II No. 1-A, Miami,
Fla., August 26, 1966.
BRAND NEW 9,500 TON CUBAN FREIGHTER. GOES AGROUND
The brand new 9,500-ton Cuban freighter MAFFO went aground on September
26th 1966 half-an-hour out of Casilda port in Cuba while en route to the south
eastern Cuban port of Guayabal where she was scheduled to have loaded sugar for
Japan. This was the first commercial voyage of the M/V MAFFO as she had made
only one trip prior to this voyage which trip had been to deliver her to Cuba
after her construction in Cadiz, Spain, on February 9, 1966.
Hurricane Inez, which hit this area with full force, probably contributed
to the accident. By October 18, 1965, it was reported that the M/V MAFFO had
been refloated.
i
i
}
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_131.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
4
A
3
difficulties we must overcome
overcome in this respect when, for example, an aptitudo
test carried out in over 2,000 state farms two years ago revealed that 60 per-
cent of the heads of farms and 80 percent of the heads of work brigades did not
even have three years of elementary schooling.
Textile Industry:
"Cuba is a country badly off in raw materials, which are also very diffi-
cult to procure. The position of Industry is closely linked to the disengage-
ment of the United States. The Americans established factories and also pro-
vided · raw materials before the revolution in Cuba. The factories belong to us
today, but we must fend for ourselves with respect to raw materials. What this
means is faithfully reflected by the fact that raw materials constitute 50 per-
cent of our overall imports. Not even in this way can we meet our requirements,
and, therefore, 40 to 60 of the capacity of our factories and plants lie idle.
Agrarian reform:
"We have not distributed land among the peasants but we have established
state farms, so-called people's farms.
The ERB's comment is that a Cuban Communist talks more honestly to a Commin-
nist Hungarian correspondent than the régime talks to the world.
FREE WORLD SHIPPING TO CUBA DOWN 65.8%
A total of fourteen Western vessels called on Red Cuban ports during the
month of August.
The August 1966 total represents & drop of 41.5% in Western shipping to Red
Cuba when compared with the August 1963 total, and a drop of 65.8% when com
pared with the August 1964 total (*).
In August's list, Great Britain continued to lead the maritime fifth column
ists with eight vessels, followed by Greece with three, and Lebanon, France and
Italy with one vessel each.
August 1963:
August 1964:
24 vesselá
41 vessels
August 1965: 22 vessels
August 1966:
14 vessels (all time low for August)
878 FREE WORLD VESSELS FLEDGED OUT OF CUBA SEA TRADE
The Maritime Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce said on Oc-
tober 5, 1956, that ninety-six ships have been removed from MA's "Cuba Black-
list" on promises by controlling parties to keep out of the Cuba sea trade
total of 878 vessels, which are either owned or operated by these parties.
There are presently 254 ships in the MA's "Cuba Blacklist", representing
1,813,855 gross tons.
16677

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_130.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
'
1
:
BULGARIA REJECTS CUBAN SUGAR SHIPMENT
Last month the Economic Research Bureau (ERB) reported the establishment of
Soviet-Cuban quality control organization to undertake steps to maintain the
quality of Cuban sugar. This organization, which incidentally has been pattern.
ed along the administrative guidelines and regulations of the Soviet Union, has
been made necessary by the increasing difficulties the Soviet refineries
having with Cuban raus. The phenomenon of declining quality of Cuban sugar is
further pointed up by Bulgaria's rejection of the first Cuban susar shipment to
that country from the 1966 harvest. This rejection, which occured last August,
was due to the high moisture content of the Cuban sugar. The source of this
information is the Cuban Institute for Sugar Research.
CUBAN CENTRAL COMMITTEE MEMBER RECOGNIZES MISTAKES
Carlos Rafael Rodríguez, one of the key figures of the Partido Socialista
Popular (name under which the Cuban Communist Party operated from 1939 to 1962),
former Head of INRA (Castro's National Agrarian Reform Institute), and present-
ly a member of the Central Committee of the Cuban Communist Party, was inter-
viewed by Josef Timmer, correspondent for Budapest's NEPSZAVA, on September 16,
1966 The Economic Research Bureau has considered Timmer's statements a sound
explanation of the real economic situation existing in Cuba. Therefore, we be-
lieve our readers will be interested in excerpts from NEPSZAVA's story of its
interview with Timmer:
Sugar
"He exert our greatest efforts in the sugar industry. Despite this
fortunately we failed to attain our objectives this year and did not even
come close to the 1965 results, primarily because of natural disasters, partic
ularly a great drought. We would like to harvest 6.5 million tons of sugar cane
next year and attain a record output by 1968." (*)
Industrial and agricultural productivity:
"Industrial and agricultural productivity diminished after the revolution.
Many people think that one must work less under socialism than urder capitalism
and, consequently, do not fulfill the legal working time. It is also true that
this is partly due to the fact that work is not organized with sufficient care,
particularly in agriculture. Moreover, serious problems are caused by the fact
that the working people are not paid according to their output. Remuneration
according to output, is, nevertheless, applied in agriculture, but we have not
managed to introduce it in industry yet.”
Skilled personnel:-
"The shortage of experts is a very great problem. Imagine what tremendous
(*) ERB note: This constitutes a contradiction of Castro's stated goals. The
Perspective Sugar Plan called for a 7.5 million-ton mark for
1967 and Castro has stressed this figure in his speeches over
and over again.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_136.jpeg ---
14-00000
4
17
1. M
13
i
:
-
2
:).
One of the trade námes being used in Europe is "Caribbean Queen". This par-
ticular label is for canned Cuban lobster and is being marketed by the firm of
Jacques Fourchstein which is also having its difficulties in this business.
The ERB has looked into the tackground of Mr. Sam Beiner and of his company,
"World Seafood Distributors". Regarding the company, little can be found other-
than the fact that its office is in beiner's home in Montreal. The address is 890
Frazer Avenue, Montreal, FC, Canada. Trade directories of Canadian firms and sim-
1lar sources available here and in New York do not list this firm. Regarding Bei-
ner, the ERB can state that Beiner has been engaged, at least since 1962, in com-
mercial activities involving Cuba. Over the years his interests have been purcha-
sing frogs' legs, lobster, shrimp, fruits, candies, and vegetables. He is known
to think favorably of the Cuban regime and in late September 1962 Beiner was open
ly discussing economic and social progress being made in Cuba while on a visit to
Miami. Boiner is characterized by people now in Miami and who have known him in
the past in Cuba as being an opportunist who was active in the Havana black mar-
ket.
Note: For additional information on this ratter see: Economic Intelligence Report,
Vol, II, No. 2, dated September 26, 1966.
=
.
U.R. Economic Research Bureau.
Miami, Fla., October 31, 1966;-
www
R
----

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_134.jpeg ---
į
•
1
14-00000
C Att.
FGA 26345
AP
*** & de
1
CEAN
1.30
h
2' 1
i
:
OCT 28 1966
133 (etc)
(200)
MIAMI, FLA., OCT. 25 (AP)-CUBA'S VITAL, BOLLAR-PRODUCING SUGAR
CROP WAS REDUCED BY SOME 300,000 ETRIC TONS BY HURRICANE INEZ,
SAYS A REPORT RELEASED TODAY BY ETILE ECONOMISTS.
THE ESTIMATE WAS CONTAINED IN AN ECONOMIC INTELLIGENCE RÉ PORT®
BY REVOLUTIONARY UNITY (UR), WHICH KEEPS AN EYE ON GUIA'S ECONOMY.
THE CUBAN COVERNMENT HAS NOT ANNOUNCED HURRICANE DAMAGE YTWBRID
IT HAD SET A 1967 SUGAR PRODUCTION COAL OF 7.5 MILLION METRIC TONS.
THIS YEAR'S HARVEST YIELDED 4.5 MILLION. A METRIC TON IS 2,200
POUNDS
MOTHERSURVEY, WHICH UR SAID WAS BASED ON INFORMATION FROM INSIDE
CUBA ESTIMATED INEZ DESTROYED 1, 58000 TONS OF RATOON. THAT
SCANT THAT SPROUTS AGAIN AFTER HAVING EN CUT. THIS DAMAGE
BEEN
REPRESENTS A 13.6,000-TON RAW SUGAR LOSS, THE REPORT SAID.
IN ADDITION, IT ESTIMATED, THE HURRICANE DESTROYED 1,360,500 TONS
OF LEFTOVER, UNCUT CANE, KNOWN IN CUBA AS "CANA QUEDADA. THIS
MEANS A LOSS OF 171,000 TONS OF SUGAR, UR CALCULATED.
BEZ SERIOUSLY DAMAGES THE QUALITY OF TOBACCO, CUBA'S NO. 2 CROP,
THE REPORT SAID. IN ONE PROVINCE, LAS VILLAS, CENTRAL CUBA, MOST
PROVING TOBACCO WAS DESTROYED, UR REPORTED. IN ADDITION, IT SAID,
ORE THAN 5,000 TOBACCO CURING HOUSES WERE DEMOLISHED.
1
CENTRAL CUBAL
COFFEE CROP DAMAGE WAS EXTENSIVE. THE REPORT SAID, WITHOUT MAKING
AN OVER
OVER-ALL ESTIMATE. THE HURRICANE HIT BURING THE HARVEST SEAS ON
AND MUCH COFFEE BLOWN OFF RECEIVED ROT DAMAGE FOR ING RECOVERED,
IT SAID.
2R5 13 AD
UFGA-26348
1.
2009 / -
QUFGA-26342
ES COPY
000/5
19-
26
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_139.jpeg ---
14-00000
FALTA
READ 115
f
WESTERN UNION
PRESS MESSAGE
WP MARSHALL PRESIDENT
1505_14-11-521
CHECK
TIME FILED
1966 NOV 18
PM 4
MIAMI, NOV. 18/66
AGENCE FRANCE PRESSE
WUX CD NEWYORK
61600
DAYLETTER COLLECT
SCIAMENTE SIETE BOQUES ABANDERAS MUNDO OCCIDENTAL VISITARON
SIENDO ESTA CIFRA HAS BAJA REGISTRADA DESDE
CUBA DURANTE PASADO
OCTUBRE
INICIOSE BOICOT MARITIMO REGIMEN CASTRO STOP ORGANIZACION: ANTICASTRISTA
MOVIMIENTO. UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA QUE MENSUALMENTE OFRECE NOMBRES BARCOS
VISITAN ÍSLA OBTENIENDO INFORMACIONES DE CIRCULOS MARITIMO INTERNACIONĀLES
AND FUENTES CLANDESTINAS CUBA DICE. ESTA CIFRA ES MENOR REGISTRADA DESDE
ELLOS LLEVAN ESTADISTICA 1962 STOP LAMBTEN SIDO
MERENI OCTUBRE PRIMERA VEZ
GRAN BRETAÑA NO FIGURA CABEZA TRAFICO MARITIMO CON CASTRO STOP SEETE-BUQUES
TÖCARON CUBA ESE MES TRES
AND DOS GRIEGOS STOP COMPARANDOLO IGUAL
ERAN CHIPRIƠTAS DOS BRITANICOS
MÉS ANTERIORES AÑOS.
DISMINUCION REPRÉSENTA 73%
ARROYO
21 9.
FR 9-8261
069%
:
4.
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
}
"UNIDAD" MONTHLY, USSUE No. 39, JULY, 1967.
FRONT PAGE:
a) RUSSIA PENETRATES ARABS' OIL MARKETS: A complete re-print of our own news release
on Soviet offers of oil to Spain, Great Britain, Switzerland, and other free-world
countries. This is related to Soviet resales of Cuban sugar.in the free world mar
ket, which provides the USSR with some hard currency at the expense of Cuba.
PAGE TWO:
a) CURA: FIRST TERRITORY OF THE AMERICAS THAT DEPENDS ON THE USSR:
•
The nerve of the Reds, who claim that Quba is the first "free" territory of the
Americas. Cuba is, in fact, the first territory of the Americas that depends al-
most completely on the Soviet Union, economically speaking. Economic dependency
can be illustrated in terms of foreign trade, and Cuba's trade with the Soviet Bloc
has increased as follows: Exports, from 2.2% in 1959 to 80% in 1966; Imports, from
0.1% in 1959 to 78.6% in 1966. Cube has also mortgaged her sugar production to the
Soviets, and, as a result from this dependency, has lost her trading power in the
free-world mrket, thus becoming still more dependent of the Soviet Bloc. No wonder
Kosygin travelled to Cuba to scold his bearded puppet.
b) CARTOON: Sign reading "Arab boycott" is hung on Arab's oil pump, while the Russian
happily collects from a free-world customer the price of the oil he has just sold
him.
:
PAGE THREE:
a) Continuation of front-page story on Soviet penetration of Arab oil market.
b) A MESSAGE TO THE MANAGEMENT OF THE "ECUADOR" SUGAR MILL: We take the problems faced
by the "Ecuador", as outlined in the EIR, and ask the management of the mill whether
they have been able to solve each and everyone of those problems.
c) Box: CUBAN:
Cooperate with the struggle against the Red tyranny. Circulate this
issue of UNIDAD after you have read it. Also send your comments and suggestions to

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_137.jpeg ---
14-00000
I press release
A-PRESS SERVICE FROM
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
OFFICE!
TO S.E. 9 St.
MAILING ADDRESS
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
PHONE:
373-8033
1
ALL-TIME-LOW
Att. #4 UFGA-26348
THE MARITIME FIFTH COLUMN-
October 1966 total down 73,1%
A total of seven (7) Western vessels called on Red Cuban poris during the past
month of October, U.R. learned from its underground and international maritime
sources.
The October 1966 total (7) represents an all-time-low for the November 1962-
October 1966 period. The previous all-time-low was the February 1965 total,
when eleven (11) Western vessels called on Red Cuban ports.
+-
The October 1946 total also represents a drop of 73.1% in Western shipping to
Red Cuba when compared with the October 1963 total; a drop of 69.6% compared
with the October 1964 total. and a drop of 66.7% when compared with the Oc
tober 1965 total. (*)
T
In October's list, Cyprus continued to lead the maritime fifth columnists with
three (3) vessels, followed by Great Britain and Greece with two (2) vessels
each.
The following is the complete list for Octobers
NAME OF VESSEL
FREE NAVIGATOR
RUTHY ANN
EL TORO
VENICE
ROULA MARIA
IRENA
NEWFOREST
FLAG
PORT
DATE
Cypriot::
Cárdenas
October 9.
☐ British
Havana
October 12
Cypriot
Havana
October 21:
British
Stgo. de Cuba
October: 22
_ Greek
Isabela de Sagua
October 27
Greek
Cypriot
Havana
October 30
Cárdenas
October 31
(*) October 1963: 26 vessels
October 1964: 23 vessels
October 1965; 21 vessels
October 1966 :
7 vessels (all-time-low for this month and
for the whole period).
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
Miami, November 18, 1966
REF.: 216
CS COPY
sleɔs 4 UFGA-26348
19-120-26
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_138.jpeg ---
14-00000
KVINNEMARANGUT UNTEN EL SURA Þ
:
1
boletín informativo
UN SERVICIO DE PRENSA DEL
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
OFICINAS:
10 S.E. 9 St.
DIRECCION POSTAL:
Bon 3940
Miami, Florida
TELEFONO:
373-8033
BAJA RECORD
QUINTA COLUMNA. MARITIMA
Total de Octubre de 1966 representa
baja de un 73.1%.
Un total de siete (7) buques del Mundo Occidental tocaron en puertos cubanos du-»
rante el pasado mes de octubre, UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA supo hoy por sus fuentes en
la clandestinidad cubana y en círculos marítimos internacionales.
El total de Octubre de 1966 (7) representa una baja record para el período Noviem
bre 1962 - Octubre 1966. La anterior baja record fue la correspondiente a Febre-
ro de 1965, cuando sólo 11 buques del Mundo Occidental tocaron en puertos cubanos.
1
El total de Octubre de 1966 también representa una disminución de un 73.1% en bu-
ques del Mundo Occidental que atracaron en puertos de Cuba Roja, cuando se compa-
ra con el total de Octubre de 1963; un.69.6% cuando se compara con el total de Oc
tubre de 1964, y un 66.7% cuando se compara con el total de Octubre de 1965. (*)
-
En la lista de Octubre, Chipre encabeza los quinta columnistas marítimos con tres
(3) buques, seguida de Gran Bretaña con sólo dos (2) buques y Grecia también con
dos (2) buques.
A continuación la lista completa del mes de Octubres
NOMBRE DEL BUQUE
FREE NAVIGATOR
-
RUTHY ANN
EL TORO
VENICE
ROULA MARIA
IRENA
NENFCREST
BANDERA
PUERTO.
Chipriota
Cárdenas
Británica
Habana
FECHA
9 Octubre
12 Octubre
Chipriota
Habana
21 Octubre
Británica
Stgo. de Cuba
22 Octubre
Griega
Griega
Chipriota
Isabela de Sagua
27 Octubre
Habana
30 Octubre
Cardenas
31 Octubre
(*) Octubre 1963: 26 buques
Octubre 1964: 23 buques
Octubre 1965: 21 buques
Octubre 1966: 7 buques
Miami, 18 de Noviembre de 1966
REF.: 221
(baja record para este mes y para
todo el período).
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
4
:
1
1
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_140.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
14
19
WESTERN UNION
PRESS MESSAGE
MARSHALL PRESIDENT
MIAMI, NOV.25/661966 NOV 25 PM 5 03
2004-11-21
T19. FILEN
1
AGENCE FRANCE PRESSE
WUX CD NEWYORK
61700
DAYLETTER COLLECT
AIRADA PROTESTA OCASIÓNADO EXILIO CUBANO RESGATIVA AUTORIDADES
ESPAÑOLAS CONCEDER ASILO POLITICO ESPAÑA CJATRO CUBANOS LLEGARON LAS PALMAS
A COMO POLIZONES ABORDO BARCO GRIEGO FREE NAVIGATOR HEREN STOP
CUATRO CUBANOC PUERON OBLIGADOS EESSA REEMBARCAR NAVE GRIEGA EXCUENTRA SE
ACTUALMENTE NAVEGANDO RUMBO ALEJANDRIA EGIPTO STOP PRINCIPALES ORGANIZACIONES
CUPAHOS ANTICASTRISTAS DERIGIDOSE AUTORIDADES NA NORTEAMERICANAS BIDONDOI
PIDIENDOLE “INTERPONGA BUENOS OFPICIOS EVITAR CUBANOS POLIZONES SEAN DESEMBARCADOS.
ALGUN PUERTO COMMISTA FESTURGIE ALEGANDO ESTO OCURRIERA QUOTE BEEN SERIAM
DEVUELTOS CUBA DONDE CONDENARIASELES TREINTA AÑOS CARCEL OR FUSILAMENTO ANTE
PAREDON: UNQUOTE STOP
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA REPORTA MENSUALMENTE
MOVIMIENTO BARCOŠ TOGAN PUERTOĴ CUBANOS ASEGURA FRISE NAVIGATÓR KNARBOLANDO
BANDERA CHIPRIOTÀ ESTUVO PUERTO CARDENAS COSTA NUITE CUBA PASADO 9 OCTUBRE
t
STOP NAVIGATOR 8181 TONELADAS OPERALO PANCRISTO CHIPING COMPANY
SUBSIDIARIA TSAVILIRIS PSA RADICA GRECIA, AND LONDRES AGOSTO PASADO AÑO
NE
EXARBOLABA BANDERA HAITIANA CUANDO FUE DENUNCIADO TRATAR
CARGAR TRIGO ARGENTIO PARA LLEVARLO CUBA
21 NW 9na Ave.
FR 9–8261
:
ARROYO
i
130
M
7

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_135.jpeg ---
14-00000
Att. #3 UFGA-26348
economic intelligence
FROM THE U.R. ECONOMIC RESEARCH BUREAU
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT
VOL. II No. 3-A-
:
MAILING ADDRESS
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
PHONE:
373-8033
:
CONTINUE TO CAUSE PROBLEMS FOR CUBA
LOBSTER EXPORTS CONTINUE
Commercial cources in Canada and confirmed by information obtained in New
York report that the Canadian and French authorities have launched investigations
into the receipt of bad lobster in both Cañada,end France. The ERB has now learn-
ed that a shipment of more than eight thousand cans of Cuban lobster arrived in
France on October 6th aboard the 2.5. KTHERINA. This shipment was consigned to
"Fourchtein et Cie." and was impounded in its entirety by the French customs au-
thorities who observed that this shipment contained swollen tins. Upon investi.
gation, impurities were discovered, the lobster was found to have been overcooked,
and in some cases gray spots were observed.
4
"World Seafood Distributors", a Montreal firm that imports Cuban lobsters
for sale in Canáðu and for transshipment to Europe, continues to have its diffi-
culties with CUBAEXPORT. ERB Cuban commercial scurces, in Europe report that Sam
Beiner, an officer of "World Seafood", is complaining to CUB EXPORT that CUBA-
EXPORT is undercutting Beiner's pricos quoted to the intwerp firm of "Hallowyck".
"Hallewyck" appoars
appoars to be
to be a major European account for "World Seafood" and in
order to protect this business Beiner was forced to tell CUBAEXPORT that "World
Seafood" may be forced to quoto "Hallowyck" cost Fices for direct shipment of
lobsters from Brazil unless CUBAEXPORT and Cuban commercial representatives in
Paris and The Hague cease these antics. This dispute involves more than two
thousand cartons of lobster..
"World Seafood" maintains a stock of Cuban lobsters in Antwerp. The ERB has
learned that Cuban commercial authorities in Europe have issued written instruc-
tions that in effect claim that more than one thousand cartons of lobster in this
stock are under the control of CUBEXFORT. Upon learning this "World Seafood" in-
formed CUBAEXPORT in Havana that it will cause the arrest of any person removing
these lobsters without pre-payment. The person concerned with attempted removal
of these lobsters is a Mr. J. M. Schwarz who appears to be releasing "World Sea-
food"'s lobsters by giving promissory notes which are not guaranteed by any bank
or other institution. "World Seafood" is understandably seeking pre-payment or at
least a guaranteed note of payment. By late September this dispute reached the
point where "World Seafood" refused to assume responsibility for a sale of more
than a thousand cartons of lobster made by Schwarz acting on CUBEXPORT instruç❤
tions. CUSAEXPORT counter-claims that Schwarz is "World Seafood"'s agent in these
sales which, of course, "World Seafood" denies.
As if these were not enough problems, "World Seafood" realizes that it can
buy similar lobster in New York at lower prices and is therefore insisting upon
an additional discount from CUBAFXFORT in order to compensate for this differ--
ence.
S/cart. 34FGA-26348
C3 COPY ·
19-120-26
[***

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_141.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
J
334
IF
CA 10
(110)
BOY 19 1966
MIAMI, FLA., NOV. 19 (AP)-A SHARP DECLINE IN SHIPPING FROM
NON-COMMUNIST COUNTRIES TO CUDA WAS REPORTED TODAY.
CKLY SEVEN VESSELS FROM THESE AREAS TOUCHED CUBAN PORTS LAST
MONTH, SAID REVOLUTIONARY UNITY (UK), AN EXILE ORGANIZATION
WHICH WATCHES SUCH MOVEMENTS. UP ADDED THIS IS THE CHALLEST PUNTERA
SINCE IT PECAN KEEPING COUNT FOUR YEARS AGO.
LISTED AS VISITING CUFA IN OCTOBER WERE THREE SHIPS FROM CYPRUS,.
TWO FROM GREAT BRITAIN AND TWO FROM GREECE.
THIS COMPARES WITH 17 SHIPS THE PREVIOUS MONTH. OTHER OCTOBER
TOTALS: 21 IN 1965, 23 IN 1964, AND 26
36 IN 1963.
SUR SAID IT DID NOT KNOW WHAT CAUSED THE DROP.
PLA35AES
5

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_142.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
DIARIO LAS AMERICAS
FUNDADO EL 4 DE JULIO DE 1933
(Por la Libertad, în Cultura y la Solidaridad Hemisférica)
-
MAMI, FLA, MARTES 22 DE NOVIEMBRE DE 1968
PAGINA 14
Micronoticias
Per SALOMON
Mrtino Jr.
In til de sinte buques
del mundy.cecidental tocaron
en parrtos rubanns en el pa.
sado mes de octubre, sëgün
Informa Unidad Revolucions
Ma, que Deva la estadistica de
qe movie maritime.
☐ total & octubre repra
senta una mera record, dea
de of the 1962 a la fecha,
do
pues ta tra caída más orv
erven
a on predaja cuande 11 bar
gos negaron a Cuba on fehre.
thalo pasada
Me reverenta una dismi
lém žel 15.1 por cienta en
briques del mundo occidental
que atrocar en puertos de
Cuba Reja. comparado con DE
tubre de 1961: un 69 por ele
to con 1964 un 66.7 por cien
to con 1965
Chipre speakers la lista de
los países que permiten a us
buques comerciar con Cuba,
seguida por Gran Bretaña y
Credia
Fla ere esta restric
ción reciepte del tráfico ma-
rítimo del mondo libre com 1
Cuba resultante de las mo
didas tomadas por of Gabler
no de EF.UT. de la ac
dón libre de los trabajadores
portuarias de varios paises,
mutá afectada en gran parte
la continua construcción
de barres en España para la
flota merrente de Castra
+
****

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_143.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
1
1
Att. #5" UFGA-26348
C13 (E)
MIANI, FLA. NOV. 23 CP)-A CUDAN IPLOMAT WHO REFECTES CAYS
"CHEA'S ECONOMY 10 WELL ON THE ROAD TO REACHING A CLIMAX AFTER
IS
SUFFERING TONE SETPACK AFTER ANOTHER."
NI
RAIL VOLTA. WHO LEFT MISPEST AS TRADE CONHCHLOR IN THE CHOAN
EASCY IN LORO A CANT TO THE UNITED STATES FOR ACYL. TOLE
LONDON
SHEN LAST NIGHT THAT GENERAL TISCONTENT LEIGHED IN CUDA EXCISE
OF CARCITIES AND ECONOMIC MIRAGEMENT.
x
WHEN HE LAST WAS IN CUPA CILY, VOLTA SAID, IT INET HIM TO
WITNESS THE "ECONOMIC CHAOS" THERE.
IN
VOLTA, 36, WAS THE FOURTH PERSON TO REFECT FROM THE CULAR
EMBASSY IN LONDON SINCE FIBEL CASTRO'S TAKEOVER IN 1952.
SAES
13
'
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_145.jpeg ---
14-00000
153 10-12-921
πt
HEAD
V.ESTERN UNION
PRESS MESSAGE
W P. MARSHALL PRESIDENT
TIME FILED
1966 NCY:22 PM 3:
MIAMI, NOV. 22/66
f
hi
.
AGENCE FRANCE PRESSE
MIX CD NEWYORK
DAYLETTER COLLECT
31520 SECUNDO ÚLTIMO REGIDON CASTRO STOP VOLTA 35 PUE PRESENTADO POR ORGANI-
ZACIÓN ANTICASTRISTA MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA REGULARMENTE PRESENTADO TODOS
_ DIPLOMATICOS DEFECCIONADO CASTRISMO STOP ADEMAS DE SEÑALAR PRACASO INDUSTRIA
AZUCARERA VOLTA ASEGURO IGUAL CAMINO PARA INDUSTRIA TÁBACALERA CUBANA SÈQUIDA
·IMPORTANCIA ISLA REVELANDO PASADO AÑO REGIMEN QUOTE APENAS LOCRO COLOCAR EUROPA
OCCIDENTAL DOSMIL, TONELEDAS MISTRICAS TABACO CON INGRESO APROXIMADO MILLON MEDIO
DOLARES STOP IGUALMENTE SEÑALO DIFICULTADES SUFRIDAS POR CASTRO SUS EXPORTACIOFÈS
LANGOSTA INCLUYENDO GRAN BRETAÑA ENTRE PAÍSES COMO CANADA FRANCIA AND POLONIA
QUE HABIAN DEVUELTO MERCANCIA PÓR ESTAB MAL ESTADO STOP QUOTE SIN EMBARQO DÍJO
VOLTA ESA MERCANCIA DEVUELTA FÙE PUESTA LUEGO VENTA MERCADO DOMESTICO CUBANO
PRACTICA ESTA SEGUIDOSE INSOLO CON LANCOSTA SINO CON TODOS PRODUCTOS EXPORTACIÓN
RECHAZADOS DESTINADOSE CONSUMO PUEBLO CUBANO UNQUITE STOP EXDIPLOMATICO.
CUBANO FÍNALIZO ENTREVISTA. ASEGURANDO QUOTE POLITICA AGRESIVA CASTRO IDO AUMENTO
AND SEGUERA POR ESE CAMINO HASTA ESTE SEA ELIMINADO - UNQUOTE
21 HW 9na ave.
FR 9–8261
ARROYO
1.961
-
12

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_144.jpeg ---
14-00000
174
*
**
BY THE COCKE A. IGEN
“ASSOCIATED" PROSS WHITEK
NOV 24 1966:
1. IZI, FLA., NOV. 24 (APTIK FRAGRANCE OF THE HIGHLY FRIZER
NAV WA, CIGAR IS DIZANTLY DING INTO CORRIG IN THE UNIT-CLOUDIN
CQMWIST SKIES, A FRIEN OFFICIAL CE TOBACCO RESTRY.
&
}
“RAUL VOLTA, A DIFERES HIS FORMER LOSS, FIBEL
CASTRO, HINGHAF ÖNNT ZURTONS OF COBUS FARER MO
2 PRODUCT.
STRUCTION SEASE OF
-CUEDOSTOTUOTT HOTLOGNESES PAROL ETNOG SUNTAAN TRIMONI THI.
APPEARL
HEST MISHANAGAMENT," WELTA, TOWER ASPICE AGAR UN COBADATO
THE STATE TOBACCO EXPORTING COMPANY, TOLD IN TESTEWAYo
CUBAT CIGARS ME SCARCE IN COLA AND SCARCE ELOYD, VOLAY SİZƏ AŞTER
ABLOID,
ARRIVING FROM LONDON, WHERE HE GAVE UP HIS POST AS TRASE COUSELOR
IN THE CUBAN ENDASO
PREDULATION
VOLUE GOUEM DIGMAS, VOLTA
-THE QUALITY, ELEGANCE AND PREJU
SAID, HAVE FALLEN VICTIM TO THINGS SUCH AS: ·
--USE OF LEAP ACC WITHOUT PROPER RUING
--SCARCITY OF MATERIALS STOR AS ALURGER 10210, WINGS AND CEDAR
BOXES USED IN PACKAGING.
--A HIGH PERCENTAGE OF WORRY CIGARS.
TWO
ALTERING OF THE TRADITIGIAL ELENDS THAT GAVE CHARACTER TO CIGARS.
USE OF INEXPERIENCED HERSCHEL IN DICRAFTING 107 QUALITY
CIGARS, RESULTING IN PRODUCTION OF UNDERSIZED, OVERSIZED OR TOČ KĽAVÝ
QOF
CIGARS."
VOLTA RÉPORTED THAT PRODUCTION HAS DECLARED FROM THE FUL-CASING.
AVERAGE OF 45,000 12 MINURILY TO 32,000 TE'S IN 1955.
HE ADDED THAT TOBACCO IN THE VIELTY REAJO RESIGN, FRIED FOR WRAPPER)
"HAS DECLINED MORE THAN TO FLA CENT IN VIE DUILITY SUE TU LACK
OF FERTILIZER AND CH”
JO
A
an
NË SAID WORKERS MAINE IN TOD1000 l DIVERTED TO
CUBA'S NC. 1 CROP, SUGAR, NEMZE TO A GARD TO ELESTEK AMAT
HE CALLED CASTRO'S SMAKY ECQIGA.
'THE EXILE ADDES THAT JUE TO LA. MIĠIS PAID TOBACCO GROHEAS BY THE
STATE, “HANY CỶ THE MOST PRONARIO HAVE DIVERTED THEIR LAIDS
TO OTHER CROPS.'
IN ADDITION, THE EXTEN
UNITY, REPOSTIÐ AFIEN
:
ANTI-CANIZMIG, REVOLMIERASY
DIRIGIOLY SMIASÈ
EXSUING ADDICTADO ZENI IN SOYOOH ANTE ESANTYS
THIS SEASON'S RAP.
117-kis
NOV 24 1955

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_148.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
A
:
5
For example, I was in Havana in July after hurricane ilm hit Western Cuba
last June, a number of buildings and houses had to be repaired all over the
city of Havana. Debris from demolitions and subsequent constructions was piled
on the streets. Time passed, but the streets were still full of debris that gave
the city the looks of a bomber target. This caused considerable disgust among
the population of Havana.
Another example is that the food quota on the ration book is largely a.
"paper" reality. What I mean is that the food on the book is rarely available,
and whole months pass without any meat, lard, oil, rice, beans, being distrib-
uted. At this precise time, in Havana, there are no seasoning ingredients avail-
able to the consumer. When the product is available again, the meager book
quota is what each one gets, without any compensation for the time during which
he could not even get that.
As a result of this, queues are longer every day, with people standing in
line since the
the early morning hours to make sure that they won't be left out.
There are often fights and even minor riots at the queues on account of the ir-
ritation that this situation causes.
Also I have seen that the régime is opening many new restaurants, alleged-
ly to make recreation facilities available to the people. In reality, however,
what they seek is to extract money from circulation, as the prices at these new
places are extraordinarily high. Hence, only the members of the ruling "new
class" may enjoy the new spots, as the working people could never afford them.
I will be happy to attempt to answer any questions that you may have re-
garding those areas of life or of events in Cuba today with which I am familiar.
Thank you.
{'
}
1
1
*
10

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_15.jpeg ---
:
:.
2
7
14-00000
☑☑
our P.O. Box.
d) Boxed Slogan: DOWN WITH THE COMMUNIST REGIME!
1
2
:
1
1
:
$.
:
:
t
=
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_146.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
++
WESTERN UNION
PRESS MESSAGE
AGENCE FRANCE PRESSE
WUX CD NEWYORK
31515
'''
WP MARSHALL PROIDENT
1966
1658 10-11-970
NECK
TIME TILED
MIAMI,NOV.22/66 22 PM 3 20
DAYLETTER COLLECT
►
REGIMEN CASTRO UTILIZA POCOS ORGANISMOS INTERNACIONALES DONDE
1
TIENT REPRESENTACIÓN PARA SUS DELEGADOG LIEVEN POLITICA SUBVERSIVA ESTABLECIENDO
MEJORES RELACIONES POSIBLES CON DELEGADOG OTHOS PAISES ESPECIALMENTE CON
LATINOAMERICANOS STOP ESTAS INSTRUCCIONES PUERON IMPARTIDAS DELEGACION PARTICIPO
CONFERENCIA CAFE CELEBRADA ELSALVADOR DONDE CUBA PODIA CONCURRIR POR MANTENER. KLE
ASIGNADA UNA CUOTA: 194,000 SACOS CAFE PESAR HACER ANOS CUBA CARECE ESE PRODUCTO
PARA EXPORTACION REVELO HOY RAUL VOLTA LANDA QUIEN HASTA HACE POCOS DIAS ERA-
CONSEJERO COMERCIAL EMBAJADÀ CUBA LONDRES AND REPRESENTANTE GOBIERNO CASTRO ANTE
ORGANISMOS DITERNACIONALES AZUCAR CAFE AND TRIGO AND DELEGADO OBSERVADOR ANTE
GRUPO INTERNACIONAL DELA LANA STOP CONFERENCIA PRENSA CELEBRADA AQUI VOLTA
ASEGURO QUOTE ECONOMICAMENTE REGIMEN COMUNISTA CASTRO ESTA LLEGANDO CLIMAX
DESPUTS SUFRIR UN FRACASO ECONOMICO TRAS OTRO UNQUOTE VATICINANDO MI PARA
AÑO VENIDERO NUEVO PRACASO PRODUCCION AZUCAR QUE REGIMEN CUBANO DIJO
SHOP INDICO HOY ÁL ANUNCIAR INICIO ZAFRA
ESTA ALCANZARIA” SIETE MILLONES TONELADAS STOP SIGUE ARROYO
$
21 NW 9na ave,
FR 9-8261
180
*
1
14-"
*
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_147.jpeg ---
2. MON, 246 68 1967 Catalyst la sua fl-****
14-00000
i
-
}
SC Att. #6 UFGA-26348
economic intelligence repo..
FROM THE UR. ECONÒMIC RESEARCH BUREAU
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
VOL. II No. 4
MAILING ADDRESS
Box 3940
Miami, Floride
PHONE:
373-8033
On November 22, 1966, Mr. Raúl VOLT: Landa met with representatives of the
pross in Miami in order to discuss Cubon trade problems abroad and Cuban econo-
mic problems within. The ERB is felt that Mr. Volta's information will be of
interest to all our readers, so therefore this issue of the Economic Intel-
ligence Report contains the verbatim account of Mr. Volta's words.
ST:TEMENT
=
My name is Rail VOLT: Landa, and until a few days ago I held the posts of
Trade Counselor to the Cuban Embassy in London, Representative to the Interna-
tional Sugar Council, Representative to the International Coffee Organization, to
the International Wheat Council, and Observer-Delegate to the International Wool
Group.
-
On November 14th my wife and I were interviewed by the press in New York
at which time we discussed the reasons that prompted our defection. The results
of this conference have appeared in the press and therefore today I would like
to discuss in some detail economic problems confronting Cuba today with which I
am personally familiar and which, I hope, will be of interest to you gentlemen.
In an effort to be brief and not take too much of your time, my friends here
have been kind enough to reproduce some technical and detailed information ca
the following subjects: sugar, tobacco, the problem of convertible currency,
problems with the lobster exports, and usurpation of registered trade marks.
There is also attached a resume of positions held since 1955. .
From the economic point of view Castro's communist régime is well on the
road to reaching a climax after having suffered one economic set-back after an-
other. Today Cuba's leading cash crop, sugar, can be termed a failure in the
sense that due to a number of factors and particularly mismanagement in Cuba
plus the low world price, it is unable to support the Cuban economy.
The second
most important cash crop, tobacco, similarly has been so mismanaged that today
it is an unimportant earner of critically needed foreign exchange.
This economic chaos has forced the Cuban régime to increasingly desperate
measures in order merely to survive. For example, meat, tobacco, eggs, fruit,
vegetables, coffee, preserves, and shoes are some of the products that today are
exported from Cuba in an attempt to earn the hard currency to purchase heavy
machinery, locomotives, fishing boats, and all the rest necessary to maintain
any semblance of an economy. An unfortunate result of this is that today there
is a serious shortage of the proper foods throughout all of Cuba. There is ra-
tioning. The people have insufficient rice. Even citrus fruits have had to be
rationed. Milk is in critically short supply. There are not enough shoes to go
around. Coffee, long considered a necessity by the people, is sometimes unob-
tainable and is always in short supply. Our beer, famous for years, is now hard-
ly drinkable when it is available. These problems, which before the communist
régime were totally unknown to Cuba, were brought painfully home to me each time
I returned to Havana from my post in London.
slca0.64FGA-2634
19-120.26
i
J
->
:
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_149.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
:
:)
3 -
SUGAR
As the Cuban representative to the International Sugar Council I was able
to observe at first hand some of the problems facing the Cuban sugar industry.
Some observations follow:
International Aspect:
It is well known that all countries that import or produce sugar are making
efforts towards reaching a long-term Sugar Agreement that would stabilize and
solve the critical situation in the world market of over-supply and low price.
Castro's stand to that respect has been to boycott and undermine such efforts.
This has been clearly reflected in Castro's refusal to participate in the
various work groups that have been created for that purpose under the sponsor-
ship of the Secretary General of UNCTAD, Dr. Raúl Prebish.
The
Castro believes that by not participating in efforts to reach a Sugar A-
greement he can cause the collapse of the sugar industries in the less efficient
producer countries in order to bring economic hardship to those countries in La-
tin America to which sugar exports are important. Castro's ultimate and, of
course, is to cause internal disturbances in these countries and thus to ripen
them for Castro-commubist subversion. This has been a boomerang to Cuba.
hoped-for economic disaster in the Latin American nations has not occured. In-
stead, it is occurring in Cuba. The régime is unable to meet its announced
goals (the goal for the sugar year 1966 was 6,500,000 tons whereas 4,455,25$
were actually harvested). To move its sugar, Cuba has been forced to grant spe-
cial discounts, for example to Japan, and to Great Britain. This further com-
pounds the chaotic economic situation in Cuba as the country obtains even less
per pound that the current low price of .014 6.
Internal Aspect:
The blows received by Cuba's sugar economy from the hurricanes and droughts
are nothing compared to the damage caused by the improvisation and incompetency
of those who today mismanage our country's affairs. The shortage of manpower
for cutting the cane, the enlistment of inexperienced volunteer" cane cutters,
the failure of combine machines from the USSR, and the deteriorating situation
in the transportation of the cane crown the existing economic anarchy.
54
The régime has been committed by Castro to produce 10,000,000 tons of sugar
in 1970, which figure sugar economists in and out of Cuba agree is most unlikely.
However, the attempt to reach this goal is resulting in activities that amount
to economic suicide. Cuba is buying generators in England costing more than one
million dollars which will be used to provide power for the "Centros de Acopio"
(reception centers). The concept of these centers was tried many years ago in
Cuba and discarded as both inefficient and uneconomical. There is no reason to
believe that anything has happened that will change this. So, what to do with
the generators?
One might conclude a discussion of Cuba's sugar problems with the observa-
tion that never before in Cuba's economic history has so much discussion, so
many speeches, and so much activity resulted in such a loss of effectiveness.
1
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_150.jpeg ---
14-00000
27
:
:
- 4 -
TOBACCO
I was associated with the tobacco exporting enterprise (Empresa CUBATAB:-
CO) for four years including three years as Assistant Manager. I am happy to
make my first hand knowledge available.
Agricultural Aspect.-
This industry is another example of the administrative clumsiness of the
Communists. Once the second industry of Cuba, and the source of great prestige
for our country, it seems to be doomed to total destruction since the Communist
régime took control of it.
.
Leaf tobacco production has declined by over 30% comparing the 1965 figure
(32,000 M.T.) with the traditional production of over 45,oco M.T. yearly. The
best tobacco fields of the famed Vuelta Abajo zone, which gave the best wrapper
in the world, have experienced a sharp decline of over 70% in yield and quality,
due to lack of fertilizers and the necessary care.
About 20% of the plantations are affected by the bug, as the fields and
curing sheds are not sprayed. The INR¼ policy of vorý lów prices paid and lack
of incentives given to the most efficient producers has forced the producers to
divert their lands to less risky and more profitable crops. This is particular-
ly true of the Remedios and Cabaiguán zones. Peasants trained in tobacco grow-
ing have been absorbed by cane growing areas in order to remedy the critical
manpower situation in the latter, but at the expense of inflicting grave damage
to the tobacco economy.. This has brought the incorporation of "volunteer" work-
ers to the cropping of the leaf, which workers, due to their inexperience in
such a specialized work, break the leaf, with the resulting damage to its qual-
ity.
Industrial Aspect.
in
-
The industrial phase of the tobacco industry has not been better off, and
our opinion it has been the one that has suffered most from the incompetency
of the régime. The quality, presentation, and production volume of Cuban cigars
has been seriously affected, not only as far as production for national consump-
tion is concerned, but also as regards the portion designed for export. It would
be endless to list the wrongs that have been done, but they may be outlined thus
1) Loss of quality due to the use of raw leaf tobacco and without the neo-
essary aging.
2) Failure to deliver to foreign customers due to the lack of intermediate
materials to finish the product, such as: aluminum tubes for packaging these
cigars, aluminum cases, holders, rings, cedar boxes, etc.
3) Continuous complaints are received from foreign importers, due to the
detection of high percentage of wormed cigars.
4) The traditional blends that gave character to each of the traditional
brands have been changed and altered, which has resulted in the imaginable loss
of quality and prestige.
!
ļ

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_154.jpeg ---
14-00000
. 8
3
NAME: Rail VOLTA Lands
1.-
2.- 1965-1966:
3.-
19641
4.- 19628
5.- 1962-1965
6.- 19618
7.- 1958-1960:
8.-
1956
Married, three children
Professional Information
Åge¹ 35
Outan Representative in the International Sugar Coun-
cil, International Wheat Council, International Cof-
fee Crganization; Observer-Delegate to the Inter-
national Wool Group.
Trade Counselor to the Cuban Embassy in London,
August December 1965: Cuban Chargé D'Affaires in Lon-
don.
Member of the Trade Delegation to Spain. Tobacco Ad-
visor.
Member of the Trade Delegation to Spain. Tobacco Ad-
visor.
Operative Assistant Manager, "Empresa CUBATABACO".
Chief of the Leaf Tobacco Section of the "Empresa
Cubana de Exportaciones".
Sales Vanager "Minemar Televisión Co." and "Fedders"
Sales Manager, Electronic Dept., "Electro Sales
(Sylvania)
U.R. Economic Research Bureau
10 S.E. 9th Street,
Miami, Fla., U.S.A.
Miami, Fla., November 25, 196.-
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_152.jpeg ---
14-00000
(
-6-
PROBLEMS WITH THE LOBSTER EXPORTS
Upon my arrival here I was surprised to learn the extent of the detailed
information possesed by UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA and its Economic Research Bureau,
This information is accurate and I am able to add more information to that known
by the U.R.
Cuba had been exporting lobster through Sam Beiner, of the Montreal firm
World Seafood Distributors". These exports wore rade by the Cuban concern ALD-
FEX to "World Seafood", and the latter re-oxportod the lobster to European firms
such as the Belgian "Hallewick" and the British "Young Seafood".
When ALIMFEX was replaced by CUBAEXPORT, the now Cuban concern tried to
grab the 'Buropean lobster market from Boiner and his Canadian firm. Thin was the.
objective for which CUBAEXPORT Director Rodolfo Shoning was working during a re-
cert European tour, and, to this end, he mado contact with the British firm -
"Young Seafood", the French firm "Jacques Fourchtcin et Ciò.", and others in
Western Europe. CUBAEXPORT was to a large extent successful in this effort to
cut out Beiner.
The troubles of CUBAEXPORT and of all other Cuban foreign trade, enter-
prises with free-world firms are due to the fact that Cuban concerns have no re-
spect for international trade ethics. They take recourse to all sorts of maneu-
vers,
ers.
as selling is their only concern; this is the long run alienates custom-
In the case of the lobster c:ports lack of quality has been apparent.
Through my office in London I learned of complaints of improper cooking, pack-
ing, and even crating of lobster exported to France, Poland, and England.
Hundreds of cases have been rejected by health and customs authorities and by
the importers themselves. The probleus Beiner has encountered in Canada have
been duplicated in Europe.¨
2
Naturally, the poor quality of the lobster has been the cause of probes by
Canadian, French and British health authorities. Even the authorities of Commu-
nist countries such as foland and Czechoslovakia have been forced to look into
the matter. These countries have returned lobster to Cuba as "unfit for human
consumption". This merchandise, however, was subsequently placed in the Cuban
domestic market, a practice that has been followed not only with the lobster,
but also with all other exports that have been turned down by Cuba's customers
abroad.
r
Perhaps less serious cases, but which also illustrate the régime's' con-
tempt for the Cuban people, are good instances of this policy. I refer to pro-
ducts which, although not quite unfit for human consumption, do not meet foreign
quality standards, such as fruit preserves that have been turned down abroad be-
cause of their excessively high contents of sugar, and rum that was returned be-
cause of impurities. These items were retailed to the Cuban people after being
rejected abroad,
There also are complaints about the presentation of the product and the
packing, all of which has caused stern protests by the affected free-world
firms, such as "Jacques Fourchtein et Cie.", which complained to ALIMPEX last
year and to CUBAEXPORT this year.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_153.jpeg ---
14
14-00000
!
-7-
USURPATION OF REGISTERED TRADEMARKS
As is known, the Castro régime, after monopolizing foreign trade and seizing
private industries, arbitrarily decreed that all Cuban trade-marks had become
the property of the government. However, with the lawful owners of these trade-
marks scattered as exiles over the free world, Castro has met considerable legal
difficulties in using the stolen brand namoo for his exports. Abroad, Castro has
been unsuccessful, in most cases, in assigning these trade-marks to the régime's -
export enterprises, as, in most countries, the brands are registered in the
names of their lawful owners.
This Castro violates international trade-mark regulations. This situation
is particularly true with respect to the world-famous trade-marks of Cuban ci-
gars. One of the best-known cases is the continued exportation of cigars bear-
ing the "La Corona" and "Honry Clay" brands, which are the property of the Ame-
rican Tobacco Company. This firm was forced to take direct action in England,
France, and Switzerland, countries to which Castro has had to halt exports.
Another example is the much-debated case of the "BACARDI" brand, which is
now being contested and which will be brought before the courts of Great Britain
by February or March next year.
In 1963, British authorities soized a shipment of Bacardi rum which was
recently returned to Cuba, and, therefore, the régime has been unable to export.
this brand to England. The rogime faces similar problems with Canada and Japan.
The first complications rising from this case took place right in Cuba,
where there were even dismissals in juridical Direction of the Ministry of For-
eign Trade early this year. Presently, Cuba is facing the following difficult--
ies in this case:
1) Legal contradictions due to Cuba's very laws of expropriations and to
the perennial "reorganizations" and "creations" of Cuban foreign trade concerns.
2) Restricted opportunities for the Cuban régime to present witnesses, as
it fears that such witnesses will take the chance to defect.
3.) Troubles between the Cuban régime and the very solicitor of the London
"Seifert and Seddeley" case.
4) Financial limitations, as the Cuban régime has only US$ 42,000 to £1-
nance the expenses of the case through the London law firm "Clark Russel".
L
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_155.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
"
TO
DIFO
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Bogota.
CLASSIFICATION
✓ SECRET
Chief, WH; Chief, FE; COS, Tokyo
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC AMSCHOLL
.
Letter from Jose R. Mercado
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
FYI
PRO
COSED
C/WH
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
ISHED
WARVES FOR INDELING
XXING OFQUIRED
QUALIFIED.
ASMASTERS DESA
***WOCA MOLKING
ABSTRACT
est d.
On 15 October Jose R. Mercado, President of the Colombian
Confederation of Workers (CTC), discussed with AMWORD-3, the Secretary
General of AMSCROLL, the CTC's plans to do what it can to discourage
Japan-Cuba trade by bringing influence to bear on the trade seminar
in Tokyo that was to have begun on 19 October. Upon his return to
Bogota, Sr. Mercado wrote a letter to the Japanese Ambassador to
Colombia, a copy of which we forward together with a translation.
=
Attachments: h/w
1. Letter (copy) as stated
2. Translation of letter
PHILIP G. ELMARD
FLOR Watt.
CS COPY
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
26 Oct 66
f
Distribution:
3- COS/Bogota, watts. h/w
(22 C/FE, w/atts, h/w 2cc
2- COS/Tokyo, watts. h/w
2- C/WH, w/its. h/w
2- WH/C, watts.
CROSS REFERENCE TO
Ext 1
i
Zant...
"
44
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
04-28 1986
DISPATCH SYMBOĻ AND NUMBER
UFGA-26277
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26
♦ 19-120-26/3
±
23
ļ
K
A

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_151.jpeg ---
14-00000
-5.
5) Incorporation of inexperienced personnel to the preparation of "Alta
Regalia", (top-quality, hand made) cigars, which affects the finish of the hand-
icrafting cigars with the result that undersized, oversized, or too heavy cigars
are produced.
These and many other irregularities take place today in our industry,
without failing to mention that the climax of all this situation is caused by
the lack of cigars for national consumption, something definitely unprecedented
in the history of our country.
Trade Aapécts.=
The Cuban Communist régime faces great difficulties in its efforts to make
dollars through tobacco exports, and some of them have been pointed out already.
F
Nevertheless, I believe that the chief trouble is represented by the mar-
ket limitations suffered by Cuban tobacco today. Castro has been unable to con-
vince his Iron Curtain "friends" to purchase the volume that was formerly ab-.
sorbed by the U.S.. He has only persuaded the USSR, Czechoslovakia, and East
Gormany to buy a total of approximately 5,000 M.T. The truth, however, is that
these exports have been made with distrust, as there have been reports that Cu-
ba's "friends", after buying this tobacco, re-export it to hard-currency coun-
tries at lower prices than those established by the Empresa CUBATABACO" for the
free world market.
I may cite a specific instance of this. Late in 1962, the Polish enter-
prise ROLIMPEX bought approximately 600 tons of tobacco. The contract specific-
ally prohibited re-exportation by the Poles, and provided that any legal diffi-
culties that might arise would be submitted for arbitration. Aftor the deliver-
ies were made to ROLIMPEX, reports began to arrive from the Free European market
that Cuban tobacco leaf was being offered at a much lower price than that estab–
lished by the Cuban exporting enterprise in its sale of tobacco to Free Europe.
At first, it was thought that this was only a maneuver for lower prices by the
European importers, but, as time passed and CUBATAB ICO could not place any sales,
the reports, which were still coming in, were given more credence. As a result
of this, I was sent to conduct an on-the-spot investigation in Europe, and, sure.
enough, I discovered that the Poles were indeed re-exporting our tobacco, with
complete disregard of their signed agreement with Cuba. The violation was re-
ported to the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Trade, which instructed CUBATABACO to
institute proceedings to recover damages from the Poles. Cuba sued for 31 mil-
lion and the Poles, having being caught red-handed, offered a settlement of
$50,000 which was accepted. The payment was made in dollars, out of the Polish-
Cuban clearing.
I
=
This "international solidarity" practiced by Communist countries kept Cuba,
for a long time. (1962-1963) from entering Western European markets.
Dumping as practiced by these countries, the lack of adecquate stocka for
the Europeans' taste, difficulties and delays in deliveries (due to shortage of
ships) have made the Europeans shy away from buying larger quantities of Cuban
leaf, and, many European importers have learned that Cuba is not a reliable
source of supply.
Due to the above stated reasons, the Communist régime can barely place
2,000 M.T. in Western Europe, for an annual revenue of about 15$1,500,000..
} +

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_156.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
27
CONFEDERACION DE TRABAJADORES DE COLOMBIA
PERSONEMIA JURIDICA NO. 271 DE 1937
FILIAL DE C.
o.
S-for
MAMBAJADOR DAL JAPO..
1. COLONISIA
'
5.
WG 1UFGA
D.
Bogotá, D.h. Cotubr: 17/66
.
Excolenticino scior Imbajadors
.
Con ocasión a que durante los
dfac 19 y 21 del presente nos se realizará un sombario de
Comercio en la ciudsi de Toquio, co la participccici de
abombs pafors de Africa Latina, la COFIDACIO DE TRA=
BAJADORES DI. COLOMBIA C.T.C., quiere reiterar por su con
ducto al Gobicno Donocrático d 1 Japón la solicitud que on
otras ocasiones homes formulado referate a que cese lo
más pronto posible el permanente comercio con su país, el-
Jape, cione establecido con el régimen Comunista de Cuba,
al considerar que las divisus con el Gobierno de Cuba lo
Bra que la venta de sus productos, ca utilizada para finan
clar la subversión y el terrorismo de la América Latina.
jucôtrà solicitud la formula.
mos coñ miras a salvaguardiar los intereses del Sindicalis
no Libro y Democrático y la integridad institucional de
nuestro país, ya que Colombia co: o otros países de frica
está comprendida dentro del prota de infiltraciones que
acado Cuba ha planificado el Gobierno Internacional, como-
lo confirme el Perildico," EL TIEMPO en juno de sus edito
riales del 12 de Octubre.
Insistimos en hacer Cota peti
cila porque consideramos que al coltinuar el Japla comer
ciando con Cuba Comuista, es tanto como contribuir a sos-
tenor un regimen on hibrica que un terminado con las liber
tada democrátions, in fontado el accinato en mapa y el
toproclamiento de llarg de Lirigentes y Trabajadores
Le Coratas. Alor Seta situación nos verisos en la
6 do organizar con otros países de América el bol
co todos los promletos japo .etes como lo hemos hecho
to, los barcos de los países que están négociando con Cuba.
E. sspora de sus gratas noti-
als ios suscribimos de Ud. atmitamente.
•-
CONFEDERACIO E SAJADORES DE COLOMBIA C.T.C.
is for
HOR
it.
CATERAL I. CHAT
TADO ALME✪ 10844 TELEGRAFO
•
CARLES ICETECES BOGOTA, COLOMBIA
339°
26277
CS COPY
19-128-26
}
t
1
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_157.jpeg ---
14-00000
Vatan ka
L
Exaro. Sr.
Ebajador dol Japon
En Colombia
E
S.
D.
att. # 2
-262.94
Bogotá, D.E., October 17, 1966
Excellence:
account of the forthcoming Trado Seminar that will take place from
the 20 tots of this month in the City of Tokyo, with the participa-
tion o s1 Lalin American countries, the CONFEDERATION OF WORKERS OF CO-
OOC, wishes to reitorate through you, to the Democratic Government
ap, the poolest wo-have formulated in other ocasións, reforent to the
coui of the permanent trade that Japan has established with the Cuban
Con, considering that the currency obtained from the selling
is used by the Government of Cuba to finance the subver
Setolism in Latin America.
of 101
sian :
Soulate our request in the hope of saving the interests of the
Darcratic workers and the institutional integrity of our country,
olia, the same as other American countries, form part of the in-
on program that has been planned from Cuba by the International Go-
vo steb, as was confirmed in the newspaper "El Tiempo" in one of its edito
October 12.
fi
☑
'
insist in this petition because we consider that if Japan continues
terd with Communist Cuba, it would be the same as to contribute to the
m qɔrt of a regime in America which has put an end to the democratic free-
as pro loted the mass murder and the imprisonment of thousands of demo
Loaders and workers. If this situation porsist, we would be forced
to rice, together with other countries of America, the boycott to all
Jayase products as we have done with the ships of those countries that are
holding trade with Cuba.
Hoping to hear from you soon, we rezali,
JOSE B. MERCADO
PRESIDENT
Na
24F69-26277
Sincerely yours,
EUGENIO MOLINA BARRIOS
SECRETARY GENERAL IN CHARGE
CS COPY
14-120
26
☑

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_158.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
·S E CRET
PRO
POSED
TO
Chief, WH Division
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/Operational
Amscreee
PROCESSING
ACTION
MARKED FOR LINDEXING
NOTINDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
'CAN FUDGE ÍNDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
10.483
☐ Quarterly Progress Reports Concerning Political Action Programs
ACTION REQUIRED · REFERENCES
•
1.
Forwarded herewith are Progress Reports for the First
Quarter of FY 67 concerning eight Political Action programs of
the Station; these programs are listed under the Covert Action
sector of the FY 67 budget: ·
AMSCROLL
AMCROW
MISM
PLISHED
:
=
#
•
AMBASAL
AMLIRA
7.
MICROFILMED
NOV-2 1966
AMSTRUT
AMWASP
AMKNOT
AMMOP
ČOC., MICRO. BER.
2.
The first quarter of FY 67 was a period of readjustment
in the political action field, all of the above programs having
been reduced in size and cost in the last quarter of FY 66. That
the PW Branch has succeeded in reaching the initial projected
goals with respect to economy of political action operations in
FY 67 is demonstrated by the following tabulation of expenses:
Program
Projected 1st
Quarter Cost
Actual 1st
Quarter Cost
AMSCROLL
36,750
AMCROW
3,750
AMBASAL
11,500
AMLIRA
16,250
AMSTRUT
24,000
AMWAS!
6,000
AMKNOT.
3,000
AMMOP
3.750
Total.
105,000
33,873
6,077
12,226
16,434
16,185
4,228
1,986
* 2,225
93,234
Attachment: h/w
Progress Reports, w/IDEN'S
Distribution:
Zall
U/S/clana)
D-14-126 34/3
2 -WH/C, w/att. ✓ CROSS REFERENCE ES EOFY-
COGW 1
Excluded kom fanatic
dongrading and
10-19-126-42/3
ID-195126 44/3
18 15 c
-
r
13
1/3
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DATE TYPED
27 OCT 56
DATE DISPATCHED
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-26303
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
27 OCT 66
19-120-26
58.19

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_159.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
CLASSIFICATION
TON SYROLUX AND NUMBER
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET
UFGA-26303
}
3. In the second quarter the Station will continue its cost
reduction action aimed at achieving a substantial reduction in
Covert Action costs prior to the enring of 1967, and at reaching
by the beginning of FY 68 a level of expenditure much below that
projected for FY 67.
7-
°
7
:
}
PREVIOUS EDITION
CLASSIFICATION
Philip G. ELMARD
SECRET
CONTINUES
PAGE NO.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
DIOS.
PATRIA
LIBERTAD
10 S.E. 9 st. MIAMI
UNIDAD
JULIO DE 1967 No. 39
PENETRA RUSIA EL MERCADO
La URSS trata de captar com-
pradores en dicho mercado.
Ocurrirá lo mismo
con los
mercados cubanos?
Exte Buró de Investiga-
ciones Económicas ha podido
„conocer que la Unión Soviétien
no ha perdido tiempo en pene -
irar el vacío comercial dejado
por la actual dislocación” del
mercado petrolero de las nu-
ciones árabes en Europa. Exis
len numerosos ejemplos.
Primero: La¨LRSS ha con•
venido en enviar un millón de
barriles adicionales de petró-
leo soviético a Esjaña, además
de los 3.5 millones de barriles
contratados con anterioridad a
la crisin del Medio Oriente,
Low soviéticos no sólo ofre-
cieron suministrar productos
petroleros, sino también los
buques-tanque para transpor
tarlos, Es más, hemos sido
informados de que un buque
tanque italiano de 40,000 to-
neladas estaba ya en el puer-
to de Tuapse, URSS. en el
Mar Negro, tomando a bordo
el petróleo que conductria a
España.
Segundo: La Junta de
Comercio británica anunció que
varias firmas británicas han
solicitado autorización para
importar petróleo crudo sovié-
Organo de
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
Especial para el pueblo de
Cubo
PETROLERO DE LOS ARABES
tico desde el inicio de În cris
mis del Medio Oriente. En el
caso de là Imperial Chemieni
Industries, Inc., de Londres,
la solicitud recaba autoriza
elón específien para importar
Rafta
runa,
Tercero: Fuentes situa-
das en Suiza y Alemania Oeri
dental informan que los consu-
midores de petróleo en ambos
paises han recibido ofertas de
los vendedores soviéticos del
producto. Como en el caso de
España, los soviéticos están
ofreciendo los productos del
petróleo y los buques para
transportarlos.
Mientras esto ocurría, y
mientras el Premier Soviético
acusaba a Israel de apresión
ante la Asamblea· Generul de
la O.N... recabando que nr
condenara a la nación judia,
la Unión Soviética segnia su-
ministrando petróleo a Israel,
Es bien conocido que due
rante los últimos añom lam na-
ciones de Europa Occidental
han estado aumentando mum im-
portaciones de petróleo sovié
tico a costa de los países ára-
bes. Low soviéticos, en cada
caso, han intentado maniobrar
para desplazar a sus aliados
Árabes mediante el expediente
de vender el petróleo a precios
más bajos. En época tan re-
ciente como 1963, la Europa
"
Europ
Occidental no importaba pr
íróleo alguno de la Unión So-
viética. En 1965, el 7% del
petróleo destinado a la Europa
Occidental ” procedía de la
URSS, y durante esos dos años
(1963-1965) la pérdida de mer-
cudos por parte de los países
árabes en Europa Occidental
fue de un 4% (al 51%). Dicha
tendencia continúa, ya que las
exportaciones totales de petró-
leo soviético aumentaron de
838.000 barriles diarios en
1965 a 953.000 barriles diários
en 1966, calculándose que ac-
tualmente ascienden
1,000.000 de barriles diarion,
Además de España, Gran Bre-
taña, Suiza, y Alemania Oeri-
dental, la Unión Soviética
cuenta entre sus principales
clientes a Italia Francia y low
puises escandinavos,
Así, pues, como vemos,
la Unión Soviética, durauite
los últimos tiempos, ha mos-
trado gran agresividad parr.
robarles sus clientes en el
mercado petrolero a sus alia-
das árabes, no obstante Mu
apoyo político a esas nacio-
Actualmente. la URSS
tiene una nueva oportunidad
de hacer nuevas penetraciones
en el mercado árabe... la
y
está aprovechando.
HON.
Pasa a la página No. 3
CAT. ICHA ZULOGE AZ KONZ

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_162.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
L
Free and Communist worlds. To these ends, prominence was given to
problems with the sugar crop, statements prepared especially for
AMSCROLL by such defectors as AMBRAY-1, AMBINGO-1, and selected
defectors from the Cuban merchant marine. The program ran a series
of quotations from earlier Castro speeches that were pitted against
official government statistics of a current nature that gave the
lie to Castro's earlier promises. Also, the program sought to exploit
such specific items as solling Cuban beef to Spain which increased
the shortage in Cuba, sending medical equipment and drugs to the
Congo though these are desperately needed in Cuba, etc.. During
this period the program received 11 letters from Cuban listeners
as follows: July, 2; August, 4; and September, 5., With one excep-
tion these letters were favorable in their response. As in the
past AMSCROLL continued to front for AMSHADY-1's radio program
over JMHOPE and AMTUMOR. Also, AMSCROLL continued to front for a
musical program which it does not produce.
B.
ADMINISTRATION
3. The amount budgeted for the quarter under review was
$36,750.00; whereas, $33,873.00 was spent. Of this amount $11,217.00:
was for salaries and $22,656.00 for operational expenses which
included office maintenance. A determined and successful effort
has been made to keep actual expenses under the budgeted amount.
Important to this was the reorganization described in A.1. above
which in salaries alone amounted to a monthly reduction of $1,200.00.
Operational and housekeeping expenses have also been reduced over
previous months with, the Station believes, an improved operational
result.
C. PROBLEMS
-
4. The Station believes that it has overcome a source of
potential trouble by pressing the reorganization of AMSCROLL that
became effective 1 July in that persons who in the past had been
trouble makers were öased out. The only remaining problem is the
ever-present one of AMFRAME-1 who is capable of earning considerably
more than the Station is paying. As an intelligent, aggressive
person with a growing family he will sooner or later have to face
up to this personal problem of his. He prefers to remain in the work
he is now doing for WOFACT which, coupled with a recent salary
increase to $450.00 a month should combine to retain him at least
for the near future. His wife has recently received an impressive
monetary prize of an academic nature and AMFRAME-1's family in Vene-
zuela is currently supplementing his WOFACT pay, which factors also
help.
D.
PLANS FOR NEXT QUARTER
5.
Administratively we expect AMSCROLL to continue as
reorganized and we are hopeful that we can effect additional
:
SECRET
$
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_160.jpeg ---
11
14-00000
SECRET
20P
:
MEMORANDUM
TO
FROM
SUBJECT:
: Chief of Station, JMWAVE
PW/MARCHBANK
TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
AMSCROLL Progress Report,
1 July - 30 September 1968
A. OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
19 October 1966
WPW-1207
Distribution
4 COS
1-PW/MARCHBANK
1-PW/Chrono
1-REG
1. This quarter opened with an internal reorganization of
AMSCROLL becoming effective. The reorganization had been under-
taken in the interests of efficiency and economy. The Departments
of Labor, Women, Foreign Affairs, Coordination, and Youth were
abolished. This action got rid of largely ineffective people who
had been receiving salaries and will prevent dissipation of AMSCROLL
funds and energies. The new, stream-lined organization is better
able to concentrate upon the field it knows best: economic action.
With its present staff it is also able to undertake action in
political, youth, and the other fields should this be desirable.
2. The major activities of AMSCROLL during this quarter fell
into four categories. They are economic activities, Pres World
shipping to Cuba, dissemination of propaganda, and the AMSCROLL
radio program,
1
In the economic field AMSCROLL continued its analysis of
the 1986 sugar harvest that officially ended at 11:00 p.m. of 27 June--
though wind-up activities continued into this quarter. The point of
the post-mortem was to publicize why Cuba fell so far short
(2,044,745 tons) of its announced goal of 8,500,000 tons, which goal
was set by "Castro in his May Day, 1965 speech. Sources of information
were the daily production figures of Radio Havana; analyses con-
ducted by other experts such as F. O. Licht, Czarnikow-Kionda, the
Merrill Lynch Weekly Sugar Letter, etc.; information the Station was
able to pass; and the background of such experts as AMSNAKE-1,
AMRAIN-1, and AMWASP-1. The Station has seen. stories based upon
these reloases in the Miami Herald; the Miami News; the Economic
Intelligence Unit, a London publication; Alerta, a publication in
Guatemala; the American Marine Engineer; the Times of America; and
Diario Las Americas. In addition appropriate station assets such as
ANHIM replay much of this information. The point of this was to
demonstrate to Free World commercial circles and to the Cuban radio
audience that Cuban economic promises are not reliable and hence
that Cuba is an unreliable nation with which to trade. In support
of this theme this quarter also marked the beginning of the campaign.
ICATION
GROUP I: EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSIFICATION
CS CUPL MICROFILMED
AT.1 UFGA-26302
SECRET
NOV 2 1966
DOC. MICRO. SER.
19.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_163.jpeg ---
14-00000
f
SECRET
i
economies. Operationally the Station has these specific projects
in mind which are in addition to the normal activities:
+
a. AMSCROLL will attempt to push further the Station-
developed story of the spoiled Cuban lobster with the goal in
mind of having it branded of dubious quality in Canada, France,
and other countries.
b. The Station has begun its utilization of AMSCROLL to
analyze the 1967 súgar harvest. As for the 1966 harvest, AMSCROLL'
final projection of the results of the harvest was made on 23 May,
some five weeks in advance of the 29 June official Cuban announce-
ment. AMSCROLL predicted a harvest of 4,496,400 tons, only 41,145
tons over the actual figuro. We know of no one who came this close.
We have observed with interest how such forecasters as Merrill Lynch
offered figures that came oven closer to the AMSCROLL projections
as the final harvest date approached. We hope to repeat this
performance for the coming year.
c.
$
At the close of this reporting period the Station began
a campaign to discourage Japan-Cuban trade in favor of expanded
Japanese trade with other Latin American nations. This campaign
has the concurrence of Headquarters and Station Tokyo (DIRECTOR-36498
and TOKYO-9962). AMFRAME-1 and AMSNAKE-1 are being utilized to
implement this campaign insofar as Latin American business organiza❤
tions are concerned.
E
SECRET
1
3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_161.jpeg ---
14-00000-
F
SECRET
-2-
:
?
against Cuban lobsters that are being sold in Canada and Europe.
The first public surfacing known to the Station of this study was
a story that appeared in the Miami News on 26 September.
This
story was prepared from an AMSCHOLL press release that was mailed
to the AMSCROLL list of business people, bankers, and traders in
the U.S., Europe, and Japan. In addition, the local AFP corres-
pondent filed a story based upon this release,
·
Also during this quarter AMSCROLL released other studies:
of an economic nature on such subjects as Cuban trade with Spain,
the status of the Cuban oil industry, and the failure of mechaniza-
tion of the Cuban sugar industry. The bases of these studies were
provided by the Station, often from information provided by qualified
refugees arriving via the air lift. In other cases, AMSCROLL
personnel--particularly AMFRAME-1--would interview some of those
refugees.
b. A continuing effort was made during the quarter to
publicize Free World shipping with Cuba. Each month a list is
compiled by the Station of those ships from the Free World thật
visited Cuba during the previous month which is passed to AMSCROLL
for release to the press. In addition, a special study was mado
regarding the Greek firm Franco Shipping Company. The wire services
regularly carry this information and 27 published stories on this
subject in U.S., Canadian, and English publications came to the
Station's attention during this period.
C. During this period 16,000 pieces of printed material
were mailed to Cuba. This included. 7,500 copies of AMSCROLL's
miniature newspaper which contained condensed stories of such items
as Castro's 26th of July Speech, quotations from earlier Castro
speeches making promises that were not kept, the sugar deficit, and
defections of Cuban seamen. Also, 7,500 copies were mailed to Cuba
of a notice that publicizes the AMSCROLL radio program and which
requests readers of the miniature newspaper to leave it in public
places for others to read. AMSCROLL still has a supply of the
soap sheets which carries an imprinted message for the recipients
not to lose hope. One thousand of these were mailed to Cuba and
we anticipate continuing mailings until the supply of these soap
sheets is exhausted. About 4,350 copies of the economic studies
described in 2.a. above were mailed to a carefully compiled list
of banks, business firms, etc. in the U.8., Europe, and Japen.
About 1,600 copies of these releases translated into Spanish were
also distributed.
d. The AMSCROLL radio program is on the air over AMTHIGH
for ten minutes each day of the week except Sunday. This program
is increasingly addressing itself to the economic failure of
communism in Cuba, the economic failure of Cuba abroad, and to the
increasing political and economic isolation of Cuba from both the
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_164.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
INDENT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X.REÉTO FILE NO.
FILE RID ➡ BET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
Dissem B/25/4
ACTION
WHIC
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
UNIT NOTIFIED
Conscrol
Filla
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY ☐ US ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUISO
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
INE
FILE UR. WITH, RITAN, C1, C1/OPS, C1/1c 2, CAZ, CA/PROP, F1, Filiort 2
-
SECRE I 2518072 C-ITE JMWAVE 3815
KINGSTON INFO DIRECTOR
sistato of
260 (20061
TYPIC AMSCROLL
1. ON 24 OCTOBER REV. HENRY MUIR, WHO SAID HE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED LIBERAL PARTY, CALLED UPON IDEN A WHO SECRETARY
GENERAL OF AMSCROLL (IDEN B). MUIR ASKED FOR ASSISTANCE FOR
HIS PARTY'S FIGHT AGAINST COMMUNIST FORCES IN JAMAICA. MUIR
SAID HE FRIENDLY WITH CHIEF LNGOLD IN JAMAICA AND
EXPLAINED HE HAS INSUFFICIENT "MEANS" FOR HIS PARTY. IDEN A
RESPONDED THAT SMCROLL HARDLY HAS MEANS FOR ITS OWN EFFORTS
AND THAT IT UNABLE RENDER SUPPORT OTHER GROUPS. IDEN A
SHOWED MUIR AROUND AMSCROLL PREMISES AND GAVE HIM SAMPLES
AMSCROLL FUELICATIONS. MUIR EXPRESSED INTEREST IN AT LEASTA
ONE PUBLICATION AND SAID IN FUTURE HE WOULD LIKE ADDITONAL
COPIES FOR DISTRIBUTION IN JAMAICA.
1
2. ON 25 OCTOBER MUIR TELEPHONED IDEN A TO ASK FOR
"A FEW HUNDRED DOLLARS" TO FINANCE TRIP TO CALIFORNIA WHERE'
MUIR SAYS HE HAS JAMAICAN CONTACTS WHO WILL PROVIDE FUNDS IF
MUIR CAN ONLY GET THERE. IDEN A DECLINED., MUIR SAID HE
UNSUCCESSFUL RAISING FUNDS THUS FAR IN JMWAVE AREA AND
25 -
SECRET
3
¡
i
T

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_165.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
SECRET
PAGE 2 JMWAVE 3815 SECRET
UNLESS HE HAS IMMEDIATE SUCCESS HE WILL RETURN. JAMAICA
27 OCTOBER.
3. STATION PLANS NO FURTHER ACTION MUIR'S REQUESTS
UNLESS ADDEES REQUEST OTHERWISE.
4. INDEX MUIR. NO JMWAVE TRACES.
SECRET
BI
•
I
*.
SECRET
'
:
:
*
'
=
11
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_166.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
"
1
INDEX: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILZ NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
E
SECRET
N/UNIT·NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
LUNTE
SUND
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP=
CA
UNIT
05.
TIME
• Mo
ACTION
WH/C8
INFO
( RID COPY
ADVANCE COPY
☐
☐ SLETTER ☐ TULEE
FILE, VK, WH8, C1, Ci/OPS, C1/162, CAZ CA/PROP, FL ELINTZ
SECRET 261809Z CITE JMWAVE 3816
KINGSTON INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC AMSCR CLL
REFERENCE:
JMHAVE 38.15 (N 26061)
IDENTITY A. DR. MARIO SE IGLIE
IDENTITY B. UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
SECRET
BT
2626068
...
SPORED
+
+
with

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_168.jpeg ---
14-00000
7.
SECRET
PAGE 2 JMWAVE 3815 SECRET
UNLESS HE HAS IMMEDIATE SUCCESS HE WILL RETURN JAMAICA
27 OCTOBER.
3. STATION PLANS NO FURTHER ACTION MUIR'S REQUESTS
UNLESS ADDEES REQUEST OTHERWISE.
4. INDEX MÚIR. NO JMWAVE TRACES.
SECRET
BT
44
11
SECRET
E
i
1
1.
:
*
F
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_167.jpeg ---
14-00000
0
TOTAL COPIES
INDEXT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
Dissem By 25/4
ACTIONL
CLASSIFIED. MESSAGE
UNIT
SECRET
NOTIFIED
13 Ne
}
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP
334
INFO
ADVANCE COPY
OH/C 8
☑ RID COPY
☐. ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TOLED
UNIT
TIME
FILE: JR WHS, R1/A11, C1, C1/OPS, C1/1C2, CA2, CA/PROP, F1, Fil1192
SECRET 261807Z CITE JMWAVE 3815
KINGSTON INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC AMSCROLL
1
ACTE 2006
26 2006:
1. ON 24 OCTOBER REV. HENRY MUIR, WHO SAID HE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED LIBERAL PARTY, CALLED UPON IDEN A WHO SECRETARY
GENERAL OF AMSCROLL (IDEN B). MUIR ASKED FOR ASSISTANCE FOR
HIS PARTY'S FIGHT AGAINST COMMUNIST FORCES IN JAMAICA. MUIR
SAID HE FRIENDLY WITH CHIEF LNGOLD IN JAMAICA AND
EXPLAINED HE HAS INSUFFICIENT "MEANS" FOR HIS PARTY. IDEN A
RESPONDED THAT SMCROLL HARDLY HAS MEANS FOR ITS OWN EFFORTS
AND THAT IT UNABLE RENDER SUPPORT OTHER GROUPS: IDEN A
SHOWED MUIR AROUND AMSCROLL PREMISES AND GAVE HIM SAMPLES
AMSCROLL PUBLICATIONS. MUIR EXPRESSED INTEREST IN AT LEAST
ONE PUBLICATION AND SAID IN FUTURE HE WOULD LIKE ADDITONAL
COPIES FOR DISTRIBUTION IN JAMAICA.
"
2. ON 25 OCTOBER MUIR TELEPHONED IDEN A TO ASK FOR
"A FEW HUNDRED DOLLARS" TO FINANCE TRIF TO CALIFORNIA WHERE
MUIR SAYS HE HAS JAMAICAN CONTACTS WHO WILL PROVIDE FUNDS IF
MUIR CAN ONLY GET THERE. IDEN. A DECLINED. MUIR SAID HE
UNSUCCESSFUL RAISING FUNDS THUS FAR IN JMWAVE AREA AND
w
1
+
SECRET
[
**
5

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_169.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDERI
□ YES ☐ NO
Fill
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. _
X-REF TO FILE NO.
D☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
FILE RID
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
Amserell /3
a
cl_ -IFIED:MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
1
B
TOTAL COPIES
31
PP.
CA
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
R
OS
190
237
ACTION
Witles
ADVANCE COPT
✓ RID COPY. ☐
☐ LAYER ☐ YEN
FILE (VEURE, Day, Dolis, CAZ colpog, luz,
UNIT
Ew
TIME
UN
ACTIONS
SECRET £71945Z CILE OTTAWA 3762.
JNWAVE INFO DIRECTOR, PARIS
TYPIC MHVIPER AMSCROLL
REF A JMWAVE 3352
B JMWAVE 3309
(IN 08755
(N06419)
7 OCT 66. 12409
NO STATION TRACES BEINER OR WORLD SEAFOOD. SEARCH OF MONTREAL,
OTTAWA, TORCITO, WINNIPEG DAILY NEWSPAPERS 26 SEPTEMBER THRỤ 6
OCTOBER HAS FAILED REVEAL ANY MENTION REF - STORY.
SECREI
6T
**
SECRET
:
!
"
1p
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_170.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
:
ACCOM
PLISHED
:
FROM
">
TCHI
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Paris
Chief, WH
Chief, WE
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/MINIPER/AMSCROLLY
C. Cuban Lobster Sales
FACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
REFERENCE:
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
See Paragraph 2.
JUWAVE-3309
LT
CIWH
PROCESSING
ACTION
-} MARALD FOR INDEXING
NOTIMPENING REQUIRED
CHLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
1. As indicated in the reference the AMSCROLL study on Cuban
problems in marketing its lobsters in France and Canada as well as
a clip of local press play were airmailed to the Paris Station on
29 September. The AFP account which was filed with its New York
offico is a much shorter and loss complete version than the clip
alroady airmailed you.
-
:
2. We are planning a follow-up story por Paragraph 3 of the
reference and will very much appreciate being informed of any French
reaction that may grow out of the AFP story or Station efforts. It
would be particularly helpful if we could indicate that the French
health authorities have found it necessary to inspect these shipments
duo to the inferior quality and improper cooking of the lobsters.
i
G
3
Distribution:
3- COS/Paris ·
(21 C/WH
2– C/WE 200
2- WH/C
fors: E/F
-
45 3
.1″
142
0.21
Enclosed a strate
AMRUTI 13 186
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PHILIP G. ELMARD
DATE TYPED
9-120-26.
DATE DISPATCHED
3 Oct 66 OCT 5 1966
SPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-26099
HEAD GARTERS FILE NUMBER
♦ 19-120-26/3
*
I
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_173.jpeg ---
14-00000
13
PAGE 2 JMHAVE 3352 SECRET SECRET
ESPECIALLY ANY OBSERVED LOCAL REACTION (REF C LISTS SEVEN
CANADIAN FIRMS AND AGENCIES THAT RECEIVED ORIGINAL-AMSCROLL
RELEASE ABOUT 23 SEPT WHICH MAY HAVE GENERATED CANADIAN
PUBLICITY). THIS INFO WILL BE INCLUDED IN FOLLOW-UP STORY.
MENTIONED PARA 3 REF A. FOR OBVIOUS REASONS PLEASE DO NOT
CHECK WITH LIAISON.
3. FOR PARIS: WILL BE HAPPY INCLUDE ANY ANGLE YOU
PROVIDE RE JACQUES FOURCHTEIN & CIE, OR OTHERS THAT MAY BE
DEALING IN CUBAN LOBSTERS.
SECRET
BI
SECRET
7
L
1
!
I
:
FAMIL x
-
-
1
Ł

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_172.jpeg ---
14-00000
33
-TOTAL-COPIF
INDERE ☐ YEN ☐ NO
YOU
“CLÁSSIFY-TO¨¯PILE NOT
BINER TO FILE NO.
Fill in all
innall
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ STO
$18.
Dissem 84zel+
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
2
SECRET-
PERSON UNIT NOTE
1
ACTION
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP.
UNIT
CA
TIME
FL-T
WH/C8
✓ RID COPY
ADVANCE COPY
☐ ...
FILE, VR, EUR 8, DO. 4, Do/H.3, CAZ, CA/PROP, C1/102, ADDP
SECRE1 0319582 0IIE JMWAVE 3352
OTTAWA INFO DIRECTOR, PARIS
TYPIC MHVIPER AMSCROLL
REFERENCES a
A.
B₁
C.
JMWAVE-3309
(NOC 1/19)
(N07355)
JMWAVE-3332 (INC
UFGA-25091 (30 SEPT')
Swider.
Cohen
Forsythe
Consults
AA
Alvare
3 OCT 66 IN 08755
NORTH AMERICAN NEWSPAPER ALLIANCE (NANA) WISHES
DISTRIBUTE FEATURE ARTICLE BASED UPON AMTAFFY-1 SIORY
DESCRIBED REF A.
PRIOR RELEASING ARTICLE NANA HAS ASKED
AMI-AFFY-1 CHECK FURTHER FOR MORE FACTS. IN ATTEMPTING THIS
AMTAFFY-1 UNABLE REACH SAN SEINER THOUGH HAS SPOKEN TO MRS.
BEINER AT REF B NUMBER WHO CONFIRMS BEINER HOME ALSO WORLD
'
SEAFOOD DISTRIBUTORS' OFFICE. SHE SAYS BEINER NOT AVAILABLE.
AS CONSEQUENCE BOTH NANA AND AMIAFFY-1. BELIEVE THEY ON TO
BIG STORY AND NANA HAS DECIDED SIT ON MATERIAL IT NOW HAS
UNTIL MORE BACKGROUND INFO ON BEINER, WORLD SEAFOOD, AND
THEIR MEIHODS OF OPERATION CAN BE DEVELOPED.
L
2. REQUEST HOS AND OTTAVA TRACES SEINER AND WORLD
SEAFOOD WITH, INDICATION WHAT CAN BE PASSED AMTAFFY-1,
OTIAWA ALSO REQUEST ANY ADDITIONAL INFO ON THIS SUBJECT,
FROM
1111
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_175.jpeg ---
14-00000
(774****
11
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
MART TO FILE NO.
PILE RID ☐ NET, TO PANCH
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE R
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
L
BY 30/4
ACTION
WH/6 RID COPY
FILE, VK, EUR 8, ADOP
TOTAL COPIES 22
ADVANCE COPY
4
☐
☐ TEO
| SLOTTER ☐ TU
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP
CA
UNIT
TIME
◉MO
SECRET 3222127 CITE JMWAVE 3332
GITAWA INKO DIRECTOR
TYPIC NHVIPER AMSCROLL
373 (007966)
REFERENCE: OTTAWA 3735
30 SEP 66 07355
WORLD SEAFOOD OFFICE LOCATED IN MONTREAL HOME OF
SAM BEINER WHO IS AN OFFICIAL OF FIRM. TELEPHONE 748-7014.
SECR'E T
UT
1
SECRET
•
7
4
**645
i
|

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_171.jpeg ---
14-00000
*>
t
+
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Ottava
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JMWAVË
BURACY TYPIC/MINIPER/AMSCROLL
Cuban Lobster
ACTION REQUIRED – REFERENCES
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PRO
POSED
ACTION REQUIRED: For COS, Ottawa to determine
REFERENCE: JUWAVE-3309.
XX
0/WH
PROCESSING
ACTION
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING-REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS -DESR
CAN JUDGE INUEKINO
ABSTRACT
“MICROFIÈM
1. We forward by separate cover the AHSCROLL report, page 4 of
which contains the study on Cuban-Canadian lobster trade discussed
in the reference as well as a clip of the AMTAFFY-1 treatment of this
study. It may be of interest to report that the mailing list
routinely used for this and similar studies of this nature contains
the following Canadian firms: Montreal Star; Canadian Intelligence
Publications, P.O. Box 130, Flesherton, Ontario; Financial Times of
Montreal; Financial Post, Toronto; Canadian Chamber of Commerce,
Montreal; Canadian Press, a news agency located in Toronto; and the
Ministry of Trade and Commerce.
4
2. As part of the follow-up play Station of course would
appreciate any reaction from the Canadian press or other sources.
Wỡ will particularly appreciate being informed if it comes to the
attention of Station Ottawa that the health authorities inspect,
condemn, or otherwise take any action on these shipments.
Attachments: USC
1
1. Report
(Excluded from automatic
domograding
Cechos.
2.Clip
Distribution:
3- COS/Ottawa, w/atts. usc
(2- C/WH, w/o atts.
2- WH/C, w/o atts.
ROSS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PHILIP G. ELMARD
19-120-26
DATE TYPED
30-Sep 66
DATE DISPATCHED
OC. 5 1986
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-26091
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
◆ 19-120-26/3
;
!
+
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
CUBA: PRIMER TERRITORIO ECONOMICAMENTE
DEPENDIENTE DE LA URSS EN AMERICA
Dicen los comunistas que
Che "el primer territorio
litre de America", y que se ha
"dependizado" del poderio
tomico de los grandes po-
tenis. La realidad, empero,
es totalmente la contraria.
En efecto, Cuba depende
hoy día de la Unión Soviética y
de sus demás satélites comu-
mistas como no dependió ja-
más de ningún otro país o gru-
po de paises.
La dependencia económi-
ca de un pais con respecto de
stro se puede medir en función
del comercio entre ambos, yz
que dicho comercio indica has-
ta que punto el uno necesita
sel otro como mercado para
sus exportaciones y como fuen
te de abastecimiento de sus
importationes.
Pues bien, en el caso de
Cuba y el bloque soviético,
las exportaciones de nuestra
potria hacia Rusia y sus saté-
es han aumentado del 2.2%
1959 al 80% en 1965. En
parecida forma, las importa-
ciones que recibe Cuba proce-
centes del bloque soviético han
aumentado de un 0.1% en 1959
3178.6% en 1966.
Los números no mienten.
Y los números arrojan la ver-
dad irrefutable de que, duran-
te 8 años de dominación comu-
nista, nuestra infortunada Isla
se ha hecho cada vez más de-
pendiente de la metrópoli ru-
sa, estrechándose cada día
más las ligaduras de dicha de-
pendencia.
•
esos
convenios comerciales
reciba metálico alguno.
En el período comprendi-
do entre los años 1963 y 1966,
Cuba sufrió un déficit de .
$1,132,000.000 en su comer-
cio con los países comunistas.
Y esta cifra no incluye la asis
tencia técnica comunista, ni
los equipos militares, las be-
cas, y demás.
Por si todo esto fuera po-
co, Cuba le ha hipotecado a la Como resultado de esta
URSS su producción azucarera. relación de sujeción con et
Cuba, también, ha agota- bloque rojo, Cuba ha perdido
do sus reservas de divisas, su vigencia comercial con los
calculandose que en 1964 ape- más ventajosos mercados del
has excedian éstas de la irri- mundo libre, lo cual, a su vez
soria cifra de $20 millones. ha aumentado dicha relación
de dependencia, produciéndose
el clásico círculo vicioso.
Como consecuencia de
esta falta total de divisas, Cu
bajno puede comerciar más
que
con los países comunistas, ya
que con éstos realiza trueques
de azúcar y otros productos
por chatarra procedente del
campo socialista, sin que de
FETROLEO ARARE
ARAHE
No en balde Kosygin se
gasta el lujo de viajar a La
Habana como un prócónsul pa-
ra regañar a Fidel Castro y
darle instrucciones.
PETRÓLEO RUSO
NINA LA AMISTAD RUSO-ARABE.
PETRÓLEO
RUSO
PENETRA... (Viene de la pág. 1) Recados a la Administracion
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONA-
RIA, durante un tiempo, ha te-
nido interés en intentar esta-
blecer una relación entre la
acción politica de la URSS y
su acción económica, y apli-
car las conclusiones al caso
cubano, toda vez que Cuba,
después de todo, depende de
la Unión Soviética para su
supervivencia política y eco-
nómica.
1
Ya hemos visto y reporta-
do, sobre la base de casos
previos, las reventas en el
mercado europeo de azúcar cu-
bano exportado a la URSS al
amparo del convenio comer-
cial cubano-soviético. El re-
sultado de estas reventas,
desde luego, ha sido el de pro
veer de dólares a la URSS en
perjuicio de Cuba. Crba se
ha beneficiado con esta manio-
bra sólo en la medida en que
le ha sido posible utilizar los
productos que se le han entre-
gado al amparo del convenio,
los cuales son, con frecuencia,
de inferior calidad e imposibles
de adaptar, al clima tropical
de nuestra patria. El yugo so-
viético sobre la economia eu-
bana nunca se ha hecho más
evidente que ahora que se le
ve a la luz del trato económi
co que da Rusia a sus aliados
árabes en el caso del petróleo.
! ABAJO EL
REGIMEN
COMUNISTA!
del Central "Ecuador"
Hemos podido saber que
en el Central "Ecuador", anti-
guo "Baraguá", se está con-
frontando una serie de dificul-
tades que son típicas de las
que hoy encara la industria
azucarera cubana en general.
Lo que no sabemos es en qué
han parado las susodichas di-
ficultades. Tal vez la admi-
nistración ñángara del "Ecua-
dor" nos pueda contestar es-
tas pregunticas que hacemos
sólo por saber, y sin ánimo de
fastidiar.
¿Ya consiguieron en Méxi-
co o en Canadá las bandas de
frenos para las centrífugas
"Roberts"?
¿Qué hubo de las piezas
para los "Caterpillar"? Has-
ta hace poco, no había ninguna
en el ingenio.
¿Qué nos dicen de los
repuestos para los motores de
las diesel G.E.? ¿Por fin pu-
dieron conseguirlas?
mente se necesitaban para lás
bombas de guarapo, las centri-
fugas y los motores de re-
ducción?
Y de las tuberías de cobre
que hacían falta, pero que no
se conseguían en el bloque
comunista, ¿qué?
¿Qué han podido hacer
con el sistema de esteras
transportadoras de la refine-
ría? Había que renovarlo, pe.
ro no se sabía como...
¿En qué paró la nueva
planta eléctrica auxiliar que
iban a traer de Alemania Co-
munista? ¿Se "trabó" el ne-
gocio?
¿Cómo han resuelto el
grave problema de los lubri-
cantes ligeros? ¿Hay divisas
para pagarle a Inglaterra por
las bombas inyectoras "Allen"
que se necesitan?
¿Por fin habrá que espe-
rar hasta 1969 para que los
soviéticos instalen las dos
¿Ya "ligaron las cajas calderas que requiere el
de bolas que tan desesperada- central?
CUBANO:
•
Coopera al derrocamiento de la tiranía. Circula
este número de UNIDAD. Cuando lo hayas leído,
dáselo a alguna persona de tu confianza, o envía-
lo por correo a algún anigo tuyo dentro de Cuba.
Colabora también con su publicación. Reporta este
número a cualquier nombre (por ejemplo, "Juana
González"), P.O. Box 3940, Miami, Florida. Envía.
nos informes sobre sucesos de interés que ocurran
dentro de Cuba. Tus críticas y sugerencias tan-
bién son bienvenidos.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_174.jpeg ---
14-00000
MESSINATION MEDIS AMERIT ADENONCEPTINATIONS & éve a die algenga 3, 11
INDERE ☐ YLE ☐ NO
CLASSITY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO:
PILT RID ☐ HET, TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ St
$10,
ACTION
EM B12/4
The WH/C 8)
CLA
FIED MESSAGE C TOTAL
TOTAL COPIES
SECRET
INSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
☑RID COPY
☐
☐ TUNEE
TILE OR EUR 8, ADDP, CAZ, CA/PROP, DOY, D0/13
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP
CA
TIME
110.
FLIC
NE
30 SEP 66 IN 07286
SECRET 302025Z CITE OTTAWA 3739
JM
IMMEDIATE WAVE INFO DIRECTOR 3739
TYPIC MHV IPER AM'SCROLL
REF. JMWAVE 3320
1.3)*
(IN07023)
CHECK OF CANADIAN INDUSTRIAL REGISTERS, FRASERS TRADE DIRECTORY,
DOMINION BUREAU OF STATISTICS COMPANY LISTINGS, FOOD PROCESSORS,
SEAFOOD DISTRIBUTORS, PACKERS 1965-1966 AS WELL AS TELEPHONE
DIRECTORIES INDICATE NO LISTING WORLD SEAFOOD DISTRIBUTORS. CHECK
INCLUDED ALL ONTARIO AND QUEBEC.
SECRET *REQUEST ADDRESS.
WORLD 36AFOOD DIST.
SECRET
BT
-
1446

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
ESCUCHA TODOS LOS
PROGRAMAS DE U.R. Y
REPORTALOS AL P.O.
BOX 3940, MIAMI, FLA.
por
"HABLA UNIDAD RE-
VOLUCIONARIA",
Radio Américas,
Américas, 1160
kcs., onda largo, de lu
nes a domingo a los 9:30
P.M.
Pepita Riera en "CONOZ-
CA A. LOS CHIVATOS",
por Radio Américos, 1160
kcs., onda larga, los mar.
tes y jueves a las 11:00
P.M.
Cubana:
a ti nadie te engarra com
la propaganda que that have
in Cuba de que no se car, de
que
tiene dedicas di que
rusas lo
upayou
les
tados
The
usas cuentas que te refi-
the todas las dias en las
perindicas, en el radio y
eu la televisión.
Videl está mucho fear
di lo que nadie se imagina
la
no tiene divisas, no tiene
créditos, love compañe
del mundo Libri e nan
retirando due comercia can
Cuba comunisti lase.
ros de todo el themse
no apaya il loricaten
quieran sequer comerciando con Videl y las
contra parser
de las que
hereas quieren exprimer al pueblo auta.
para cobarse la que tidel le dike.
noticias o
de la
are, pues, char: Permanece alerts distribu
ye
que pasa in the centro de trabaja, da
propaganda, via informes
nombres de chivatas, etc. como ya lo
cen miles de cuarios como the fy el s.2
si comités se suteran
fees in siesta
no las cage is las quem mile crane sal-
andas rebeldes y felinars del regimen
experare il momenta di la liberación que
to aseguramos llikeracion
!
I
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_177.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
She ⑈
55 82, 12 ***}|
INDEX: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FALE no.
Fill
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
DISSEM/B428
ACTION
INFO
(WH/C8
L
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
B TOTAL
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
44
32
19-120-226
E
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP-
BR
THE
Mo
FL
$
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
☑ RID COPY
☐ ATSUES ☐ SEPTIED ☐
TIME
FILTER, ADOP, EUR 8, CAZ, CA/PROP, Cific 2, D04, DO/H3
SE RET 2928276 CITE UNWAVE S509
DIRECTOR INFO OTTAWA, PARIS
TYPIC MHVIPER AMSCROLL
29 Sept 6.6 A
IN 0649gler.
USING DISGUISED SENSITIVE SOURCE INFO AND OVERT
DATA STATION PREPARED STUDY OF CUBAN MISADVENTURES IN
CoMen
Forsythe W
Gonzalez L
SELLING TINNED AND FROZEN LOBSTERS TO WORLD SEAFOOD DISTRIBUTALurado,
OF MONTREAL AND JACQUES FOURCHTEIN & CIE OF FRANCE.
ARTICLE STRESSED LATE DELIVERIES, SHODDY CUBAN BUSINESS PRACTICES,
IMPROPERLY COOKED MEAT, AND ENDED ON NOTE THAT LATEST SHIPMENT
OF FROZEN LOBSTER TO WORLD SEAFOOD CONTAINED QUANTITY ROTTEN
LOBSTER WHICH DISCOVERED ONLY AFTER SIX OR SEVEN HUNDRED
CARTONS HAD BEEN DISTRIBUTED THROUGHOUT CANADA.
12. STUDY RELEASED BY AMSCROLL 26 SEPT. AFP FILED
STORY 26 SEPT AND ALTAFFY-1 PROVIDED EXCELLENT COVERAGE 29
SEPT. BELIEVE ADDITONAL PUBLICITY THESE FACIS
ESPECIALLY ABROAD WILL FURTHER EXACERBATE AT LEAST CUBA/
CANADA TRADE. RELEASE AND CLIP FORWARDED HQS. ALSO
AIRMAILING PARIS, POLCHING OTTAWA.
3. FOLLOW-UP STORY IN PREPARATION.
SECRET
E' T
6T
SECRET
-x

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_179.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDERT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
- FILE RID
DESTROY
RET. TO BRANCH ◎
$10.
“
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE B
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
3!
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED.
Ew
DISSEM BY 28
ACTION
WH/C &
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY ☐ SUE ☐ SAAYE ☐ TULEE
UNIT
TIME
$
FILE, KR, FE8, CAZ, CA/PROP, CA/04, ADDE. CifeA, Cifaps, cificz
19 Sep 6699102.
SECRET 192151Z CITE JMWAVE 3106 (INGHURST ACTING)
DIRECTOR INFO TOKYO
TYPIC MHVIPER
REFERENCE: TOKYO 9840 (IN 97101)
SUGGEST AMSCROLL THROUGH IDEN WRITE TRADE ORGANIZATIONS
WITH WHICH IDEN IN CONTACT IN ARGENTINA, BRAZIL, COLOMBIA,
MEXICO, AND PERU SUGGESTING THEY BRING PRESSURE THEIR :
GOVERNMENTS TO INCLUDE JAPAN-CUBA TRADE ITEM ON GROUNDS THIS
TRADE PROVIDES CUBA WITH FUNDS FINANCE SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES
THESE COUNTRIES. PLS ADVISE.
SECRET
SECRET
**
:
BT
NNNN
!
i
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_176.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
INDEXT ☐ LES ☐ NO
CLASSITY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ● RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY: ☐ 610.
C
SECRET
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
ACTION BY 15
ADVANCE COPY
30 M
+
PRACHATIC
AND
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
PP.
☑ RID COPY
☐ ... QUES ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TURER
FILE, IR, ADDP, EUR 8, CA2, CA/PROP, DO 4, DC/H3
Eur
TIME
MO
FITC
SECRET 301600Z CITE JMWAVE 3320
IMMEDIATE OTTAWA INFO DIRECTOR
!FO
TYPIC MRV IPER AN SCROLL
REFERENCE:
L
WAVE-3309 (2024119 7*
(4034/19)*
30 SEP 6607023
REQUEST BY IMMEDIATE CABLE EXACT BUSINESS ADDRESS WORLD SEAFOOD
DISTRIBUTORS WHICH WE BELIEVE TO BE IN MONTREAL AREA OR POSSIBLY
TORONTO. FYI MONTREAL TELEPHONE OPERATOR HAS INFORMED LOCAL
NEWSPAPER ATTEMPTING TO CHECK REF STORY THAT THERE NO FIRM WITH
THAT NAME IN MONTREAL.
SECRET
BT ERE CUBAN SELLING OF
SECRET
LOBSTERS.
T
F
d
1
1
I
$

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_180.jpeg ---
14-00000
".
4.11. JUIV
INDEX! ☐ YES
NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF.TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ NET, TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ $10.
DISSEM BY 28
012
•
ACTION
WH/C8
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
-
B
TOTAL-COPIES
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
110
EL-TC
ew
TA
PP.
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
✓
RID COPY
☐ ☐ ☐ TURC
FILE, VA, FE8, CAZ, CA/PROP, CA/04, Arep, 01/0A, CH/CP's c1/182
6
SECRET 192151Z CITE JMWAVE 3107 (INGHURST ACTING)
DIRECTOR INFO TOKYO
TYPIC MHVIPER
REFERENCE:
JMWAVE 3106 (IN 99102)
IDENTITY: MANAGEMENT BOYCOTT COMMITTEE.
SECRET
BT
SECRET
NNNNN
2.
1
19 SEP 699092
t.
**
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_178.jpeg ---
14-00000
5.1
INOTXI ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
8. TEF TO FILE NO.
POLE RID
RET. TO BRANCH ☐
STROY ☐ SIG.
DISSEM 1433/M
WH/C 8
TOTAL COPIES
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE GIOTAL
SECRET
INIT NOTIFIED
+1
31
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP
CA
DELM
TUE
Mo
E
TIME
ins
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
♫ RID COPY ☐ ISTUCE ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUNED
FILE, VK, EURS, CAZ, CA/PROP, DO4, DO/H13, 01/102,
1
:
SECRET 292114Z CITE JMWAVE 3301-
M
DIRECTOR
Swider
Cohen,
29 SEP 65 IN 06358
TYPIC MHSPAWN
REFERENCE: DIRECTOR 37778
Forsythe
Conzalez
1. AMSCROLL RADIO ON 21 SEPTEMBREPORTED CUBAEXPORT
WAS NEGOTIATING TO SELL CUBAN BEEF TO COMISARIA GENERAL IN
TWO UNITS OF ONE THOUSAND TONS EACH. BROADCAST RECALLED
DECEMBER SALE BEEF TO SPAIN WHICH UPON ARRIVAL WAS FOUND TO
BE SHORT BY 135 PIECES. BROADCAST FOR 29 SEPTEMBER WILL
UPDATE THIS REPORT USING INFO CONTAINED REF.
2. JMHOPE AND OTHER RADIO ASSETS WILL HIT THEME OF GOC
EXPORTS OF MEAT WHILE CUBAN PEOPLE SUFFERING SEVERE SHORTAGE.
WILL POINT OUT THAT HARD CURRENCY OBTAINED BY GOC IN TRADE
WITH SPAIN AND OTHER FREE WORLD NATIONS USED BY GOC TO EXPORT
SUBVERSION AND VIOLENCE ABROAD AND TO STRENGTHEN INTERNAL
POLICE STATE MECHANISMS. THUS SUBANS LOSE BEEF AND GAIN MORE
CONTROLS.
SECRET
THUS SUBANS
SECRET
15
1
}
ļ

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_184.jpeg ---
7
14-00000
:
!
SECRET
UNDER SEPARATE COVER to
OBMA-21648, 10 Aug 66
Identity
"3E, Economia Espanola y Exterior”
÷
SECRET
/cart CSMA-21648
CS COPY:
19-120-26
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_181.jpeg ---
14-00000
4.
TO
F. OM
PATCH
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Kingston
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
BUBJECT
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PROY
© TYPIC/MIVIPER/AMSCROLL/Economic Intelligence Report
ACTION REQUIRED · REFERÈNCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
For Kingston to determine.
Clwble
PROCESSING
ACCOM
ACTION
BLISHER
FMANNED FOR INDEXING
NO INTERING REQUIRED
ONE QUALIFIED
KEA\VARTERS DESA
CAN FLOGE INDEXING
ARSTRACT
1. Por COS, Kingston's recent request we forward by separate
cover twenty-five copies of the publication, Economic Intelligonce
Report. This is issued monthly in English and until we are informed
otherwise we shall in the future forward twenty-five copies under a
transmittal manifost. This publication is issued infrequently in
Spanish; we shall forward five copies of these as they appear.
2.
Station JMWAVE will appreciate any local reaction to this
publication as well as suggestions for the inclusion of material
that might be useful to a Kingston audience. As indicated by the
edition being forwarded we attempt to keep the items in each Roport
factual on the grounds that in a publication of this nature facts
constituto the best propaganda.
'
Attachment:
uso
PHILIP G. ELMARD
GROMP 1
Excluded fro... [T¿9'
downgrading 346
903561103139
DATE TYPED
CS COPY_
CROSS REFERENCE TO
25 copies Report
·Distribution:
3- COS/Kingston, w/atts, usc
2- C/WH, w/o atts.VĚ TELBÍSIFICATION
2- WH/C, w/o atts.
SECRET
DATE DISPATCHED
7 Sep 66.
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-25925
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
SEP 8 1988
19-120-26
19-120-26
!
|

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_183.jpeg ---
14-00000
¢
F
"
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
"
SECRET
LUSCATE.Mt
SUVPFÄ
OSMA-21648
With a view toward economy it should be noted that
Madrid Station took the liberty of excluding some of the
We suggest
material which was included in the first report.
that the reports be limited to one or two pages if feasible.
In this manner we feel we will have a better chance at publi-
cation.
5. In the last several issues Identity has publishod
various articles of a favorable nature towards the PBRUMAN
economy. Station has reason to believe the primary purpose
of the favorable articles is that the director of Identity is
attempting to ingratiate himself with the PBRUMEN Government
so that he will bo well received by PBRUMEN officials if the
Spanish Government nominates him as the Spanish commercial
representative to PERUMEN.
!
r
USE PREVIOUS EDITIO%
1
15
Leslie H. HENDRIQUE-
C. ASSIFICATION
SECRET
3
! contine:
PAGE NO

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_186.jpeg ---
14-00000
10UR
economic intelligence report
* FROM THE U.R.-ECONOMIC RESEARCH BUREAU -
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
4tl.
PECA
25559
OFFICE:
10 S. E. 9 St.
MAILING ADDRESS
Boa 3940
Miami, Floride
PHONE:.
373-8033
-
VOL. I No. 11-A (Suplemento Especial):
EXCLUSIVO PARA EL BURO DE INVESTIGACIONES
ECONOMICAS DE UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA.
LA CALIDAD ACTUAL DEL AZUCAR CUBANO
Por el Ingeniero Raúl Esparza Tabares
ex-Director de Investigaciones Tecno-
lógicas del Ministerio del Azúcar (MINAZ) de Cuba Comunista
Este breve análisis de la calidad actual del azúcar cubano va dirigido tanto al
perito en azúcares (como pasó inicial de lo que podría convertirse en un estudio mas
técnico y exhaustivo) como al lector ordinario, toda vez que, en Cuba, el azúcar es
casi sinónimo de prosperidad económica, y así, la calidad del azúcar desempeña un pa
pel de gran importancia en la situación económica global del país (1).
Sin mas comentarios o notas de introducción, ofrecemos a continuación el análi-
sis de la calidad actual del azúcar cubano;
1.- Materias Extrañas,
"
a) Azúcar crudo, La industria azucarera cubana se caracterizaba por recibir pa-
ra su procesamiento, la mejor calidad de caña de azúcar en cuanto a su contenido de-
materia's extrañas (menos del 3%). Actualmente y por causa de los trabajadores v0-
luntarios" por un lado y por otro a la mecanización de la cosecha de la caña, las ma-
terias extrañas que acompañan a la caña al llegar al Central para su procesamiento
ha aumentado al 8% en el caso de los voluntarios y al 19% en el caso de las máquinas
de cortar caña soviéticas. Es: de señalarse que dentro de la composición de estas ma
terias extrañas está incluida la tierra, y como quiera que las tierras de Cuba tienen
en su composición un alto contenido de arcillas, estas son muy difíciles de eliminar
en el proceso tecnológico de purificación y afectan grandemente la calidad del azű -
car crudo.
-
-
-
b) Azúcar Refino, Las materias extrañas, principalmente arcillas de las tierras
llegan hasta el azúcar refino dándole color al mismo y dejando residuos insolubles
al ser disueltas esta azúcar. Esto disminuye la calidad del azúcar refino no sola
mente para el consumo humano directo; sino que ocasiona graves perjuicios en las in-
dustrias de alimentos que utilizan el azúcar refino. Lo mismo sucede con las indus-
trias de refrescos.
(1) No es necesario ensalzar la calidad del azúcar cubano que producía antes de
Castro, ya que su prestigio en el mercado mundial es un hecho de sobra cong
cido. Lo mismo puede decirse de los técnicos cubanos en azúcar, con quie
nes los expertos internacionales han tenido amplia oportunidad de discutir
los asuntos azucareros e intercambiar ideas y sugerencias libremente. Esta
situación ya no existe.
s/cat. i UFGA-25559
CS COPY.
19-120-26
F
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_182.jpeg ---
14-00000
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
=
PROCESSING_ACTION
BASTED FA D
xx
NO (BOLJUNG REQUILLO
ORLY QUALIFIED DÈSa
CAN MAKE MOLENS
->>
AMSCROLL Articies for Republication
1
1:00
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Chief, European Division
Deputy Chief, EH/C
SSV JU Chief of Station, Madrid
SUBACT
KEYWAY/PBRUKEN/KHVIPER
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCER
Act:
Ref:
For your infomration
UFGA-25559, 21 July 1966
I
1. Madrid Station appreciates the excellent support
which JMWAVE Station has provided in referenced operation.
It may be of interest that the publication of the articles
cited in reference cost approximately $200.00
2. Through CUSPOT-2 Madrid Station mado contact with Iden-
tity in an effort to establish on outlet for the publication
of economic reports concerning Spain and PBRUMEN. It was
agreed with the directors of Identity that the articles would
be paid for at the same rate as paid advertisements; however
they would appear as exclusive reports of Identity and bear
no resemblance to a paid advertisement. Because of various.
legal ramifications, Identity agreed to publish only those
articles which were signed.
.
3.
QUSPOT-2's approach to Identity was made ostensiblý
under the auspices of a PBRUMEN exile group with whom he said
he was affiliated, the headquarters of which are ostensibly
in the JMWAVE area. It was agreed that the JMWAVE exile group
would furnish the material directly to Identity, with a copy
to QUSPOT-2, who, after receipt of the article, would then
approach the directors of Identity to ascertain the price
of the article and push for its publication. In this regard.
Madrid would appreciate continuing with this practice for the
mailing of articles intended for publication (with a copy
pouched to Madrid) as was established.
Attachment:
Identity
UNDER SEPARATE COVER
Distribution:
2-COS, JEWAVE, w/att,
2-C/EUR, w/att, USC
1-DC/WH/C, w/att, USC
CROSS REFERENCE TO
cust
8/0 ATT'D BY RI/AN
Dated 18-8-66
USC O\
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
OSMA-21648
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
CS COPY
☐ DATE
(continued)
Group I .
-
Excluded
from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
19-125-26
10 August 1966
MGS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_185.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
$
INFO
CH
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Madrid
Chief, WE; Chief, WH
FROM
Chief of Station; JMWAVE
SUBJECT KEYWAY/PBRUMEN/MHVIPER
①AMSCROLL
CLASSIFICATION
· S E CRET
XX
ANSCROLL Article for Republication.
*ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
None
C/WE
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM.
PLISHED
MARVED FOR INDEXING
WO`INDEXING REQUIRED
GALY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
BCROFILM
+
1. A result of QUSPOT-2's recent holiday in the JMWAVE area has
béon to establish a correspondence between him and AMFRAME-1, the
signer of the Suplemento Especial of the AMSCROLL Economic Bureau, a
copy of which is forwarded by separate cover. QUSPOT-2 has indicated:
that he could use AMSCROLL economic studies and that he could arrange
for publication of at least some of these in Identity A. He suggested
that the original of such publications be sent to Identity B with a
copy to him. This was done in the case of a recent economic report
which was shortly thereafter published in Identity A. QUSPOT-2 air-
mailed this story to AMFRAME-1 which arrived at about the same time
as the copy the Madrid Station airmailed to the JMWAYE overt address.
2. We wish that the article being forwarded by separate cover
also be surfaced in Identity A. The original has been airmailed to
Identity B with a copy to QUSPOT-2 per QUSPOT-2's suggestion. JMWAVE
fools that this is a useful mechanism and unless advised to the
contrary we propose to forward additional AMSCROLL studies to Identity B
for publication in Identity A. Should Madrid prefer we, of course,
in the future forward such articles directly to the Station for
placement instead of airmailing them to Identity B.
3. Studies similar to the one being forwarded are regularly
prepared in English on a number of economic subjects. They are
distributed to shipping firms, certain banks engaged in international
commerce, international trade organizations, international commodity
houses, etc. They are translated into Spanish solely for use in
Identity A; thus, in this sense, these reports are an "exclusive",
can
Attachments: usc
1.
2.
AMSCROLL Article,
Identity Sheet
Articlefant
Distribution:
GROUP 1
Excistes farismatic
Chengrading, and
declassificatios
PHILIP G. ELMARD
Povel….
3- COS/Madrid, w/atts use - To OUT Pooch.
-
-
(2 C/WE, w/atts. usc' CROSS REFERENCE TO
2- WH/C, w/atts. usc
2cc
2an.
Su/c/es w/SCA (2)
CS COPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
13-120-26
DATE TIPED
DATE DISPATCHED
18 July 66| 2/
66/21 July
PRIDOL AND NUMBER
CFGA-25559
**D5 FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
1966

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_187.jpeg ---
14-00000
-> 2
=
E
2.- Polarización:
a) Azúcar crudo, En épocas anteriores al régimen comunista, Cuba no producía azú
cares crudos con polarizaciones menores de 97.0 a 97.5 %, y mara muchos mercados ex-
tranjeros se reducían azúcares crudos con polarizaciones superiores a 98.0%. En la
actualidad un porciento significativo de la producción no alcanza esos valores, dán:-
dose casos de azúcares crudos con polarizaciones de 96.0 y 95.0 %.
b) Azúcar Refino, Las calidades mejores de azúcares refinos o blancos se miden
en los mercados internacionales principalmente por su grado de polarización, la cual
deberá ser como mínimo 99.9%. Los azúcares refinos en la actualidad bajo el régimen-
comunista no alcanzan esa cifra, manteniéndose entre 99.70 y 99.80 %.
3.- Humedad :
a) Azúcar Crudo: Los azúcares crudos cubanos siempre se caracterizaban por su ba-
jo contenido de humedad, lo cual los hacía de magníficas condiciones pora resistirial
macenamientos molongados y manipulación segura a estos azúcares. Actualmente el con
tenido de humedad ha aumentado hasta un 200%, debido a varios factores como son, con-
tenido de coloides producidos por las arcillas de las tierras, condiciones deificion
tes de las centrifugas de azúcar, mayor contenido de mieles en el azúcar, etc. Ade -
más, en muchas ocasiones, azúcares producidos en buenas condiciones se deterioran de-
bido a la humedad existente a causa de deficiencias en el almacenaje en centrales y
puertos de embarque.
b) Azúcar Refino, La deficiente tecnología y el mal estado de los equipos apropia
dos han dado como resultado un aumento del contenido de humedad en el azúcar refino
dé casi un 70%. Además azúcares provucidos con bajo contenido de humedad en las refi
nerfas, son alterados por el mal estado de los almacenes.
4.- Materias insolubles:
a) Azúcar Crudo, El contenido de materias insolubles en el azúcar crudo ha aumenta
do aproximadamente en un 250% debido a là mala purificación de los jugos de caña duran
te el proceso tecnológico, y a la introducción de materias extrañas conjuntamente
la čaña que van a parar hasta el azúcar.
con
b) Azúcar Refing, El uso de azúcares crudos de baja calidad, la deficiente calidad
del Acido Fosfórico, la Tierra de Infusorios, y el Carbón Activado, productos éstos en
viados por los países comunistas, han tenido como consecuencia un aumento del porcenta
je de materias insolubles en los azúcares refinos de aproximadamente el 200%, reducien
do considerablemente la calidad de estos azúcares refiños.
。- Color:
5.-
a) Azúcar Crudo, El Indice de color de los azúcares crudos ha aumentado casi en un
300%, lo que reduce proporcionalmente la calidad de estos crudos como materia prima en
las refinerías.
b) Azúcar Refing: Este es uno de los factores importantes en la calidad de los azú
cares refinose blancos, y en los años recientes, debido a deficiencias tecnológicas,”
a la ausencia casi total de técnicos con experiencia, y a la baja calidad de los mate-
riales decolorantes tales como el Carbón Activado suministrado por Polonia y la Unión
Sovistica, el índice de color, medido en Unidades ICUMSA, ha aumentado en un 200%. Es
de señalar que ninguna refinería del país cumple las especificaciones en cuanto al in-
dice de color establecidas por los Métodos Internacionales de Control de Calidad.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_189.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
d) Contenido de Arsónicos- El Arsénico es una de las contaminaciones que mas afog
tan la calidad de cualquier producto alimenticio, y mucho mas significativo es en el
azúcar. Los productos auxiliares usados en la refinación del azúcar tales como Acido
Fosfórico suministrados por países comunistas, tiene un alto porcentaje de Arsenico-
los que contaminan el azúcar, habiéndose elevado esta cifra en un 70% sobre los valo-
res normales.
-
e) Contenido de Plomo, La presencia de Plomo en los azúcares refinados debe ser -
significativo, mro en los últimos años el empleo de Tierras de Infusorios y Acido Fog
fórico de países comunistas que tienen baja calidad y están contaminados con este alg
mento, ha rroducido un aumento del contenido de plomo en los azúcares refinos de un
50% sobre los valores normales.
`f) Contenido de Cobre: Los azúcares de Cuba se caracterizaban por su ausencia de
Cobre, sin embargo al usarse los productos contaminados y de baja calidad suministra-
dos por los países comunistas, y por otro lado el mal estado de los equipos que tie
Then partes de Cobre, han dado como resultado un aumento en el contenido de Cobre 11s-
gándose a obtener valores de 2 a 3 % de Cobre en el azúcar refino.
CONCLUSIONES,
1.- Bajo el presente régimen, la calidad del azúcar cubano ha sufrido un tremen-
do deterioro.
2.- La industria azucarera cubana no ha sido una excepción al principio de que
"el Comunismo es sinónimo de baja calidad".
3.- Los gobiernos, los pueblos y las firmas de los países que aún adquieren azú
car de Cuba deben tomar nota de este breve análisis.
Por el Buró de Investigaciones Económicas de U.R.
Miami, 7 de Julio de 1966
k
Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vázquez
Director
}
I
I
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_190.jpeg ---
1.
14-00000
SX CRET
SC
I PANTITI LIER
"B-E". ECONOMIA ESPANOLA Y EXTERIOR,
B.
Jose Ramon sparicio Manes
paricio Manos
Director, "9-8"
Peace Onesimo Redondo 23
Madrid, Spaia
-
Sleat. LUFGA-25554
CS COPY
Attach. #2
UVGA-28559 .
_
*
19-120-26
r
:
MA
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
m
:
INDEX) ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
1-4E TO FILE NO.
FILE 710 ☐ RET. TO BRANCH
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
ACTION
INFO
24
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
E
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
WH/CG- & & RID COPY
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
--
63
☐ ISTED ☐ SLOTTED ☐ YUSER
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UXIT
TINE
FILE, VR, WH-8, SB-8, DDP, HSP, CA. 2, CA/PROP, CA/0-4
Celops, CE/EC.2, FE
SAGU
SECRET 282031Z CITE SANTIAGO 4743
NE-8, AF-7
28 JUL S? :: 21 36!
20 Jul
DIRECTOR INFO MEXICO CITY, CARACAS, MONTEVIDEO, BOGOTA,
BUENOS AIRES, RIO DE JANEIRO, JMWAVE
ANEE BF
ax/a/ca
ABSTR OF ✗
TYPIC REDCOAT AMSCROLL
1.
PEC 28 JULY CENTER SPREAD CARRIES JMSCROLL STUDY
CUBAN TOTAL DEPENDENCE SOVIET UNION. SUBTITLES "FIDEL CASTRO
HAS MADEHDOUNTRY OF MARTI COLONIAL NATION SUBJECTED SOVIET
IMPERIALISM", "FOREIGN TRADE MONOPLIZED BY NATIONS SOVIET
ORBIT”. CLIPPING TO JMWAVE. HENCEFORTH POUCHING PEC
JMWAVE REGULARLY.
2. SAME ISSUE HAS GOOD ITEMS OLAS, NASSER AND
FOISON GAS, ANTI-SEMITISM SOVIET UNION, BATTLE FOR POWER
COMCHINA, HARRISON SALISBURY ARTICLE SOVIET CENSORSHIP.
=
:
:
SECRET
(1)
ET
L.
19-120-26
28 July 1967

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_188.jpeg ---
AL
14-00000
>
3
6.- Problemas Específicos del Azúcar Crudo :
Filtrabilidad, El Índice de filtrabilidad que mide las propiedades precisamente
de refinación del azúcar crudo, ha bajado en un 250% en los años recientes, afectando
seriamente los costos de producción de las refinerías que emplean este azúcar crudo co
mo materia prima.
+
b) Uniformidad del grano de Azúcar. Como consecuencia de la total ausencia de
quinos automáticos para controlar la cristalización del azúcar, ya que la gran mayoría
ha sido destruído y no reparado, la uniformidad de los cristales o granos del azúcar
crudo ha disminuido a lideres inverosimiles. Es casi imposible observar azúcares cru-
dos actuales que no tengan un alto Indice de "conglomerados", "gemelos", y "Falso gra-
no", lo que hace que la uniformidad de los cristales no se mantenga, ocasionando per-
juicios a las refinerías que emplean esta azúcar como materia prima por la cantidad de
mieles e impurezas que conllevan. Esto reduce la capacidad de las refinerías y aumen-
ta considerablemente su costo de producción.
.
c) Aspecto Sanitario, La falta de cuidado en cuanto a la higiene con que debe ser
producida el azúcar, así como las calidades de las aguas que se emplean para el lava-
do de los azúcares en las centrifugas, el poco cuidado y esmero con que son tratadas-
én los almacenes, han producido un descenso en cuanto al aspecto sanitario de los azú
cares acusándose un aumento considerable en el contenido de hongos, bacterias, y leva.
duras. Todos estos elementos extraños afectan la calidad y producen fermentaciones
secundarias en el azúcar destruyéndose parte de la sacarosa de las mismas, lo cual re
duce los rendimientos en las refinerías de azúcar y aumenta considerablemente el cos-
to de producción.
d) Envases: Los envases que viene utilizando el régimen comunista en los azúca
res crudos, son en parte elaborados en la Unión Soviética. Estos envases de yute son
de ínfima calidad y además como no tienen las medidas standards, el azúcar se compac-
ta dentro de los sacos, produciéndose muchas roturas de los mismos.
e) Azúcar Endurecida, Como consecuencia de la deficiencia en la tecnología de
producción, las materias extrañas, y las malas condiciones de los almacenes, el Indi-
ce de azúcares endurecidos en almacenamiento ha aumentado casi un 200%. Esto trae »
como consecuencia grandes dificultades en las refinerías al disolver al azúcar y sa -
carla de los sacos. Además al aumentar el costo de manipulación, se aumenta el COS-
to de producción.
7.- Problemas Específicos del Azúcar Refino s
-
a) Azúcares invertidos, Debido a la deficiencia tecnológica y a la baja calidad
de los azúcares crudos utilizados, el contenido de azúcares invertidos ha aumentado en
un 150% en los últimos años con el resultado de la baja de calidad de este tipo de azú
car.
b) Cenizas, Como consecuencia de la gran cantidad de materias extrañas y la baja
calidad de los azúcares crudos, así como la deficiente calidad de los Carbones Activa-
dos empleados en las refinerías, el contenido de cenizas ha'aumentado en los últimos
años en un 50%, afectando la calidad de estos azúcares.
c) Contenido de Azufre (SO2), El contenido de azufre en los azúcares refinados de
be ser extramadamente bajo ya que afecta la salud del consumidor y crea grandes difi-
cultades en las industrias que usan el azúcar. Como consecuencia de la baja calidad
del Acido Fosfórico Soviético que tiene un alt contenido de Azufre, los azúcares en los
Ultimos años han_sufrido un aumento-del-100%-en-su-contenido-de-azufre-lo-que-afectaṁ
la calidad de los mismos.
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_192.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
-
0
-
CLASS UP SERvice
This is fest mming-
unless na défected char-
Betet la indicated by the
proper symbol.
WESTERN UNION
1. W. MG ALL
Por that
W. P. MARSHALL
CHAIRMAN OF THE DORO
TELEGRAM :
-
The filing time shown in the date line on domestic telegrami às LOCAL TIMI“ et point of otirin. Titus of excript is LOCAL, Vihti es quedat que
1026P EST JUN 30 66 AA010
1906 JUN CPM (30
A CD U8 03 W UT 0245 RMB3806 SWN0702 M014454 31 PD INTL CD MALMOE
VIA RRCA 30 $300
LT ING RAUL ESPARZA MADERA
290 VAPP 3 CORALGABLES (FLO)
MANY THANKS YOUR KIND LETTER OF JUNE 14 STOP WE ARE LOOKING
FORWARD TO YOUR
REPORT WITH GREAT EXPECTATIONS SINCERELY
TORSTEN GAARDLUND
CFM 290 3 14
(10)
FOUCH SECURITY VIOLATION
NGFIELD DISTRIBUTION
EFL01(R2-65)
h
CS COPY
ATT # ITO UFGA 25445
1
19-120-26
DEC 126 58
Bant
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_191.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
CLASSIFICATION
_SECRET
POSED
XX
- PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARTES VIR INGEKING
TREASING REQUIRED
VERSLASTUS VESK
CAR FISA MDEXING
ABSTRACT
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE BPV
BUBJECT
TYPIC/MHVIPER/Cable from Professor Torsten Gardlund
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
REFERENCE:
Response from Headquarters to Reference Requested.
UFGA–25367
We forward by separate cover a copy of a cable received by
AMRAIN-1 from Professor Torsten Gardlung. -This is in response to
the interim reply sont the Professor by AMRAIN-1 after receipt of
the questionnaire. We request a reply to the reference as soon as
feasible a view of the considerable interest expressed in this cable.
Rose E. Manchlan
for PHILIP G. ELMARD
4
ANTIFI
ABSTRACT
Attachment: USC
Cable as stated.
Distribution:-
3- WH/C, w/att. usc :
1 ATT.
Berkile
GROUP 1
Extra automatic
-
CROSS REFERENCE TO
19-120-
CS-COPY
G
A reclassified
File
SAMSCROLL
19-120-2613
PROP
FOUCH SECURITY VIOLATION
CO FIELD DISTRIBUTION
DATE TYPED
5 July 66
2-326-568
_DATE DISPATCHED.
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND HUMBER
UFGA-25445
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
◆ 19-120-26/3
JUL & Gi
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_193.jpeg ---
14-00000
COMITE PRG 201COT EMPRESARIAL
Management Boycott Committee
P. O. BOX 390
MIAMI, FLA.
->
33101 • U. B. A.
CURAN MERCHANT MARIJE CFFICIALS, OFFICERS AND CREFUEMBERS WHO HAVE ABANDONED
THE IR POSTS DURING RECENT MONTHS
The "Free Cuban Merchant Marine Committee" releases the "score" of Cuban merchant
marine officials, officers, and crewmembers who have abandoned their posts during
recent months, thus increasing the lack of qualified personnel in the merchant
fleet, another problem presently faced by the Castro-Communist regime.
The "Free Cuban Merchant Marine Committee" has up-date the "score" since the first
one it released the "score" contains full names of merchant fleet officials, of… ·
ficers, and crewmen, ranks, names of vessels, port where the defections occured
and dates,
I.- SCORE.-
1
:
ä
NUMBER OF VESTELS: 16
NUMBER OF PERSONNEL: 29.
Captain:
S
Chief Engineer: 9
First Officer:
2
Second Engineer: 1
Helmsman;
2
Radio Operator, 1
Others:
6
Supervisor,
29
* Attached is the statement of Raul de la Rua Castro, former Chief Engineer
of the MV SIERRA MAESTRA, who jumped ship in Murorán, Japan, on March 20,
1966.-
-INTERRUPCION-DEL-INTERCAMBIO_COMERCIAL_Y_TODd_transporTE MARITIMO con cuba cOMUNISTA.
(ACUERDO DE LA CAMARA DE COMERCIO DE LAS AMericas, XV CONVENCION anual, JunIO¯16, 1965)¯
INTERRUPT COMMERCIAL EXCHANGE AND ALL MARITIME TRAFFIC WITH COMMUNIST CUBA.
(RESOLUTION OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE AMERICAS, XV ANNUAL CONVENTION, JUNE 16, 1965)

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_194.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
' ...
C
II.-LIST-
NAME
RAUL DE LA RUA CASTRO
ARNALDO GIL LOPEZ
DANIEL SOMOZA
JOSE OYARZABAL J.
RUBEN HERRERA MARTINEZ
MIGUEL FERNANDEZ GARCIA
SALVADOR VENEITO VAZQUEZ
ANTONIO DURAN GONZALEZ
JOSE ANGEL SEARA RIVAS
ALCIDES LOYOLA MARQUEZ
FRANCISCO DALTABUIT
MANUEL FERNANDEZ
MARCOS ESTRUCH
POST
Chief Engineer
Ass. Supervisor
First Official
Chief Supervisor
Steward
Second Engineer
Electrical Technician
Seaman
Helmsman
Cook
Captain
Helmsman
VESSEL
SIERRA MAESTRA
1
PLACE
Muroran, Japan
Bilbao, Spain
_DATE
March 20, 1966
March 14, 1966.
Barcelona, Spain
March 10, 1966
Madrid, Spain
March 5, 1966
COMBATE DE PALMA MOCHA
JIGUE
St. John, Canada
MATANZAS
1.
PINO DEL AGUA
BAHIA DE TANAMO
13 DE MARZO.
FRUCUBA
RIO JIBACOA
RIO JIBACOA
MANUEL ASCUNCE
MANUEL ASCUNCE
Tokyo, Japan
Bilbao, Spain
Cadiz, Spain
Madrid, Spain
St. John, Canada
El Ferrol, Spain
El Ferrol, Spain
Bilbao, Spain
Bilbao, Spain
Bilbao, Spain
March 4, 1966
Feb. 4, 1966.
Feb.
4, 1966
Feb. 4, 1966
February, 1966
Jan.
31, 1966
Jan. 20, 1966
Jan. 20, 1966
Jan.
4, 1966
Radio Operator
JESUS CRESPO
Steward
Jan.
4, 1966
HUGO LEY ACHON
Chief Engineer
FRANCISCO FDEZ. SAN ROMAN
Chief Engineer
FRANCISCO COBAS OSES
Captain
ANTONIO ARIAS
MARIO PEREZ GIRON
HUMBERTO E. FERNANDEZ
A. CESAR LOREDO GARCIA
AUGUSTO GONZALEZ DUQUE
P. ROBERTO SURROCA
ALBERTO TORRES GOMEZ
FELIX GONZALEZ ALPI
JORGE I. SALCEDO
EMILIO LEAL VALDES
LUIS CASAS CAMPA
RAUL GONZALEZ
First Officer
Chief Engineer
Purser
Captain
Captain
Chief Engineer
MANUEL ASCUNCE
SIERRA MAESTRA
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
ARACHLIO IGLESIAS
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
CAMILO CIENFUEGOS
UVERO
UVERO
Jan.
4, 1966
Antwerp, Belgium
Osaka, Japan
Osaka, Japan
Osaka, Japan
Dec. 31, 1965
Dec. 27, 1965.
Dec. 27, 1965
Dec. 27, 1965
Chief Gen. Inspector
Chief Engineer
2
Chief Engineer
BAHIA DE TANAMO
HABANA
13 DE MARZO
13 DE MARZO
MATANZAS
(2)
Captain
Chief Engineer
Chief Engineer
Osaka, Japan
Madrid, Spain
Colombo, Ceylon
Colombo, Ceylon
Madrid, Spain
St. John, Canada
Barcelona, Spain
Bilbao, Spain
Rotterdam, Holland
Barcelona, Spain
Naval construction supervisors stationed at Spanish shipyards.-
Dec. 20, 1965
Dec. 18, 1965
Dec. 18, 1965
November, 1965
Oct. 25, 1965
October, 1965
Aug. 23, 1965
August, 1965.
March,
Chief General Inspector for Mambisas (Official Cuban shipping enterprise) stationed in Spain.-
Dec. 27, 1965
1965
*
DU KAN DU JADE PO
1-

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_196.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
COMITE PRO BOICOT EMPRESARIAL
Management-Boycott Committee
P. O. BOX 3900
MIAMI, FLA.
->>
33101 • U. 8. A.
:
MIEMBROS DE DOTIACIONES DE LA HARINA MERCANTE CUBANA QUIENES HAN ABANDONADO SUS
BUQUES RECIENTEMENTE
El "Comité de la Marina Mercante Cubana Libre" da a conocer el total de funciona-
rios, oficiales y tripulantes de la Marina Mercante Cubana que han abandonado
cargos durante los últimos mesos, aumentando con ello la falta de personal califi
cado en la flota mercante, otro problema que el régimen Castro-Comunista afronta
en el presente.
El "Comité de la Marina Mercante Cubana Libre" ha puesto al día el total de funcio
narios, oficiales y tripulantes de la flota mercante desde la primera que se dió a
conocer. Este total contione-los nombres complètos, el rango, nombre del buque,
puerto en el cual lo abandono y fechas.
I.- SCORE.-
KAMILAC CALLAS Y VINDENT LOAN
16
Miestros de las dotaciones: 29
Mizero de buques:
:
1
Capitán:
Jefe de Máquinas:
na
5
9
"
Primer Oficial:
2
Segundo Maquinista:
Timonel:
2
Radio Telegrafista:
Otros:
6
Supervisor:
Anniom
R
Total:
NOTA:
Adjunto se encuentran las declaraciones de Raul de la Rua Castro, ex-Jefe de M
quinas de la Motonave SIERRA-MAESTRA, quién abandono al barco en Murorán, Japón
en Marzo 20 de 1966.
"
INTERRUPCION DEL INTERCAMBIO COMERCIAL Y TODD TRANSPORTE MARITIMO CON CUBA COMUNISTA.
(ACUERDO DE LA CAMARA DE COMERcio de las Americas, XV CONVENción anual, Junio 16, 1965)
INTERRUPT COMMERCIAl exchangE AND ALL MARITIME Traffic with communist Cuba.
(RESOLUTION OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE AMERICAS, XV ANNUAL CONVENTION, JUNE 16, 1965)

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_195.jpeg ---
14-00000
STATEMENT OF RAUL DE LA RUA CASTRO.-
:
My name is Raul de la Rúa Castro, and I was the Chief Engineer aboard the Cuban MV
SIERRA MESTRA until March 20, 1946, when I jumped ship in Vuroran, Japan.
I
.
Working conditions in the Cuban Merchant: Fleet also influenced my decision.
could not stand the intensified espionage on board by members of the G-2. It is
worth mentioning that the plan to indoctrinate Cuban merchant crews was a complete
failure. The regime has abandoned the project altogether, and is now trying to
place loyal Communists as officers and crewmembers, even if they are not qualified
for their jobs..
As a matter of fact, the lack of qualified personnel is an increasing problem, and
another source of trouble aboard Cuban vessels. During the last months a total of
twenty nine officials, officers and crewmembers of the Cuban Merchant Marine have
defected (data of up-to-date merchant marine score). After I quit the SIERRA MAES
TRA, for instance, there was not a single certified engineer on board, although
there were several young fellows getting on the job training. This is a fact that
should be taken into consideration by the insurance firms that underwrite Cuban
vessels.
Most of the vessels are faced with all sorts of mechanical difficulties, due to
lack of spare parts and a very faulty maintainance, situation that gets worse when
consider the scarcity of qualified personnel just mentioned.
I am very happy to have joined those of my fellow Cuban officers who preceded me
in this decision. I wish to thank the "Free Cuban Merchant Marine Committee" for
all the attentions accorded me, and I hope to rejoin our merchant fleet soon, when
our vessels again sail under the flag of a free country.
i
7
Miami, April 1st, 1966.-
1
FREE CUBAN MERCHANT MARINE COMMITTEE
830 SOUTH MIAMI AVENUE
MIAMI, FLORIDA 33130
1
F
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
FORM 2593
2-66
CONFIDENTIAL
NOTICE
THIS FILE HAS BEEN PROCESSED AND RETIRED. DO NOT
ADD ANY DOCUMENTS TO THIS FOLDER. FORWARD CS
DOCUMENTS THAT SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THIS FOLDER
TO RID/RPU GE-58.
NOTICE
CONFIDENTIAL
t
:
(7-131
I
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_198.jpeg ---
14-00000
_
i
1,
DECLESICIONES DE RAUL DE LA RUN CASTRO, –
Mi nombre 08 Raul de la Rua Castro y hasta el 20 de marzo de 1966 desempeñé el
cargo de Jefe de Máquinas de la Notonave SIERRA MAESTRI, cargo este que abandons
en Merordn, Japón,
Las condiciones de trabajo en la Marina Mercante Cubana fuoron uno de los motivos
que me llevaron a tomar mi decisión. Tampoco podía continuar soportando el espio-
naje y la vigilancia a bordo por miembros del G-2. Vale la pena mencionar que el
plan de adoctrinamiento para los miembros de las dotaciones de la flota mercante
cubana ha fracasado completamente. El régimen ha abandonado dicho plan y lo único
que hace ahora es sustituir a los que abandonamos los buques por personal "politi-
camente apto", pero carente do capacidad técnica para desempeñar los cargos.
De hecho, el régimen confronta un serio problema ante la escasez de personal técni
co capacitado y titulado, y ésto constituyo otra fuente de problemas a bordo de
los taques cubanos. Durante los ultimos meses un total de veinte y nueve funciona
rios, oficialos y tripulantes de la flota mercante cubana han abandonado sus car-
gos. Fara que se tenga una idea sobre la gravedad de este problema resulta necesą
rio salar que después que yo abandoné el SIERRA MAESTR1 no quedó a bordo un sólo
maquinista con titulo, a pesar de que varios muchachos jóvenes se encontraban alli
recibiendo entrenamiento, poro por supuesto, aun sin 'ol debido titulo. Esta es una
realidad que debe ser considerada seriamente por las firmas aseguradoras de buques
cubanos.
La mayoría de los buques confrontan dificultades en lo referente al funcionamiento
debido principalmente a la falta de piezas de repuesto y al mantenimiento defectuo
so y poco eficiente y como es natural este problema se acentúa con la escasez de
personal técnico capacitado en las dotaciones.
Deseo manifestar que estoy contento de encontrarme junto a tantos otros compañeros
de la Marina Mercante que me han precedido y quiero agradecer públicamente al "Co-
mité de la Marina Mercante Cubana Libre" las atenciones que ha tenido conmigo, así
como la ayuda que me están prestando, y sinceramente espero poder volver a la Mari
na Marcante en un futuro próximo; cuando una vez más podamos navegar bajo el pabe-
llón de una Patria libre.
1
:
t
COMITE MARINA MERCANTE CUBANA LIBRE
830 SOUTH MIAMI AVENUS
MIMI, FLORIDA 33130
Miami, Iro. de Abril de 1966.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_199.jpeg ---
14-00000
PK.
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
CONFERENCIA DE PREMSA DE RAIL ESPARZA TABARES
J
Mi nombre es Raúl Esparza Tabares y hasta hace escasamente un mes me encontra
ba presidiendo la Delegación-Cubana-a-la-Conferencia-Internacional de Expertos en
Azúcares_de_la_FAO (Food & Agriculture Organization-de-las-Naciones Unidas-)-que- se
celebró en Londres del iro, al 3 de Marzo de 1966, al mismo tiempo que ocupaba el
cargo de Director de Investigaciones Tecnológicas Azucareras del MINAZ y formaba
parte de la "Comisión de Estudios del Plan Perspectivo Azucarero".
A mi lado se encuentra mi señora Josefa Reus y nuestros hijos Roberto, de 21
años y Raúl, de 22 años, ambos estudiantes de ingeniería de la Universidad de La
Habana.
Antes de hacer un breve relato de la odisea de mi familia para abandonar el
país, deseo agradecer a los compañeros de UNIDAD REVOLUCIONAR IA las atenciones
que han tenido para con nosotros y al mismo tiempo por darme esta oportunidad de
hacer estas declaraciones a los periodistas del mundo libre.
*
=
;
Desde hace dos años todos nos encontrabamos tratando de abandonar el país pe-
ro nos había sido imposible. a mi no se me permitía salir debido al cargo que ocu
paba y ni siquiera se le daba esta oportunidad al resto de mi familia. Cuando lo
de Camarioca nos fue a recoger un barco y las autoridades cubanas ni nos avisaron
de que dicha embarcación se encontraha allí. La única salida era abandonar el país
en bote nor la vía clandestina. La oportunidad se presentó durante mi estancia en
Londres. Yo había salido de Cuba el 23 de febrero de 1966 dejando atrás a mi seño
ra y a mis dos hijos, uno de los cuales, Raúl, se encontraba enfermo de hepatitis ·
en La Habana.
Mi señora tuvo que tomar la decisión sin encontrarme yo a su lado, pero había
que aprovechar la oportunidad que se presentaba y salir por la vía clandestina del
país. De la odisea pueden dar detalles ellos mucho mejor qe yo y posiblemente los
miembros de la prensa desearán hacerles algunas preguntas al final de mis palabras.
Muy brevemente les diré que ellos se sometieron al mismo proceso que tantos
otros cubanos se han sometido, es decir, lanzarse en bote a cruzar el "corredor de
la muerte" con la confianza que Dios los ayudaría a arribar a tierras de libertad.
Dos intentos fallaron pero por fin, el tercer intento fue un éxito y al menos el
grupo completo, unas veinte personas, se montaron en el bote y pusieron proa a los
Estados Unidos, el motor se rompió y la travesía fué la mayor parte del tiempo 8
vela al cabo de casi dos días el agua y la escasa comida se habían agotado y en
re
t
i
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
1
TELEFONO FR 3–8033

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_197.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
II.- RELACION
NOMBRE
RAUL DE LA RUA CASTRO
ARNALDO GIL LOPEZ
DANIEL SOMOZA
JOSE OYARZABAL J.
RUBEN
HERRERA MARTINEZ
MIGUEL FERNANDEZ GARCIA
SALVADOR VENEITO VAZQUEZ
ANTONIO DURAN GONZALEZ
JOSE ANGEL SEARA RIVAS
ALCIDES LOYOLA MARQUEZ
FRANCISCO DALTABUIT
MANUEL FERNANDEZ
MARCOS ESTRUCH
JESUS CRESPO
HUGO LEY ACHON
CARGO
Jefe de Máquinas
Supervisor Asistente
Primer Oficial
Supervisor-Jefe
Camarer
Segundo Maquinista
Electricista
Marinerc
Timonel
Cocinero
Capitán
Timonal
Radio Telegrafista
BUQUE
SIERRA MAESTRA
1
MATANZAS
1
COMBATE DE PALMA MOCHA
JIGUE
PINO DEL AGUA
BAHIA DE TAÑIAMO
13 DE MARZO
FRUCUBA
LUGAR
Murorán, Japón
Bilbao, España
Barcelona, España
Madrid, España
St. John, Canadá
Tokyo, Japón
Bilbao, España
Cadiz, España
Madrid, España
FECHA
Marzo 20, 1966
Marzo 14, 1966
Marzo 10, 1966
Marzo 5, 1966
Marzo 4, 1966
Feb.
4, 1966
Peb.
4, 1966
Feb.
4, 1966
Febrero,
1966
Enero 31, 1. /
Enero 20, 1966
Enero 20, 1966
Enero 4, 1966
Enero 4, 1966
BEERE
FRANCISCO FDEZ. SAN ROMAN
FRANCISCO COBAS OSES
ANTONIO ARIAS
MARIO PEREZ GIRON
HUMBERTO E. FERNANDEZ
A. CESAR LOREDO GARCIA
AUGUSTO GONZALEZ DUQUE
F. ROBERTO. SURROCA
ALBERTO TORRES GOMEZ
PELIA CONZALEZ ALPI
JORGE I. SALCEDO
EMILIO LEAL VALDES
LUIS
CASAS CAMPA
RAUL GONZALEZ
Camaterc
Jefe de Máquinas
Jefe de Máquinas
Capitán
Primer Oficial
Jefe de Máquinas
Sobrecargo
Capitán
Capitán
Jefe de Máquinas
Inspector General
Jefe de Máquinas
Jefe de Maquinas
RIO JIBACOA
RIO JIPACOA
MANUEL ASCUNCE
MANUEL ASCUNCE
MANUEL ASCUNCE
SIERRA MAESTRA
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
ARACELIO IGLESIAS
CAMILO CIENFUEGOS
UVERO
HABANA
UVERO
2
BAHIA DE TANAMO,
13 DE MARZO
Jefe de Maquinas
13 DE MARZO
Jefe de Máquinas
MATANZAS
Capitán
St. John, Canadá
El Perrol, España
El Ferrol, España
Bilbao, España
Bilbao, España
Bilbao, España
Antwerp, Bélgica
Osaka, Japón
Osaka, Japón
Osaka, Japon
Osaka, Japón
Enero 4, 1966
Dic. 31, 1965
Dic.
27, 1965
Dic.
27, 1965
Dic. 27, 1965
Dic.
27, 1965
Dic.
20, 1965
Colombo, Ceylán
Colombo, Ceylán
Madrid, España
Madrid, España
St. John, Canadá
Barcelona, España
Bilbao, España
Dic. 18, 1965
Dic. 18, 1965
·Nov.
1965
Oct. 25, 1965
Octubre, 1 }
Ag.
23, 1965
Rotterdam, Holanda
Agosto,
1965
Barcelona, España
1965
Marzo,
I
1
(1) Supervisor de construcciones navales, prestando servicios en España.-
Inspector General de la Empresa de Navegación Nambisa.-
(2)

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_200.jpeg ---
+ be
14-00000
2.
tonces apareció un buque griego que després de facilitarles agua y algunos ali-
mentos lo comunicó al Servicio de Guardacostas de los Estados Unidos y poco des-
puéstun avián Gatekinė voleba suure ei lugar y marcaba el sitio para facilitarle
-la-tarea-a-una-de-sus-unidades navales que ya se encontraba en camino.
-
La llegada del buque del Servicio de Guardacostas Norteamericano fud real
mente providencial, pues mi familia y los otros tripulantes del bote observaban
aterrorizados como por la popa ce acercaba velozmente una plancha patrullera cuba-
na que al ver el buque norteamericano viró en redondo y regresó a Cuba.
Yo me encontraba en el hotel en Londres y una llamada de larga distancia me
puso al corriente de la situación. Ellos se encontraban a salvo y ahora me toca-
ba el turno a mí.
Lallamada informándome del arribo de mi familia a los EE.UU. 110g6 precisa-
mente cuando me encontraba reunido con el resto de los miembros de la Delegación.
Estos me observaban atentamente, como queriendo adivinar lo que se me decía des-
de el otro lado de la línea. Por tanto, tuve que desplegar mis escasas dotes de
actor teatral y simular que la llamada era oficial desde Cuba.
Ante esta situación, opté por informar, falsamente, a los restantes deiega-
dos que el gobierno cubano me había encargado el cuidado de otros asuntos, por
lo que tendría que demorarme algunos días mas de los previstos en Madrid.
Los dije también que me reservaran pasaje a bordo del vuelo de la semana si
quiente y les entregue una carta para mi familia. Llegué a Madrid el 4 de Mar-
ZO. Las autoridades españolas me brindaron toda clase de facilidades, incluso
posteriormente la de ofrecerme hasta protección personal, puesto que cuando en el
MINAZ se conoció mi desaparición, el gobierno notificó a las embajadas cubanas en
Londres y Madrid que me encontraran y que me llevaran de regreso para La Habana
aunque tuviera que ser a bordo de un buque cubano y por supuesto, en contra de mi
voluntad.
No deseo tomar mas tiempo para anécdotas personales y si lo he hecho ha si-
do porque estimo que ayudan a comprender la verdadera situación que se vive en
Cuba. La situación de los funcionarios que como en mi caso, desean la libertad
de nuestra Patria, y que nos encontramos sujetos a vigilancia, a represión, mis
hijos expulsados de la Universidad y sujetos a las mismas privaciones que el res
to de nuestro Pueblo.
Pasemos ahora al tema principal de esta conferencia, que es a la vez la es
pina dorsal de la economía cubana y por tanto el factor determinante de la es
tabilidad o de la caída del régimen de Fidel Castro: el AZUCAR.
7
14

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-
MEMORANDUM
TO
: Chief of Station
FROM
:
CA/Roger E. MARCHBANK
SUBJECT:
A.
TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
AMSCROLL Progress Report
1 April
-
30 Juno 1967
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
10 July 1967
WCA 1395
Distribution:
COS
CA/MARCHBANK
3
-
1
-
1
-
1
-
RI Chrono
CA Chrono
1. During the quarter under review AMSCROLL continued with
its program to discredit the Cuban regime's economic management
(or mismanagement) and to seek to discourage Free World trade
with Cuba. To this end AMSCROLL continued publishing its serious
economic studies and comment of the Cuban economic area. This
material is made available to selected firms engaged in inter-
national trade and shipping, to commercial and technical journals,
and to sugar brokers including certain banks and others interested
in the sugar trado. AMSCROLL also continued with its radio program
which is beamed to the Cuban audience and which is increasingly at-
tempting to provide serious comment upon economic developments in
Cuba or those areas of economic activity outside of Cuba which would
have an interest among the Cuban listeners. During this quarter
AMSCROLL received 15 letters from Cuba which compares with 18 re-
ceived during the previous quarter. The monthly count was: April
6, May 5, June 4.
->
2. On 30 April AMSCROLL ceased broadcasting over AMTHIGH.
Effective 1 May the program was presented over JMHOPE. This change
in station (and a consequent change in time) has perhaps effected
the listenership in Cuba; however, we expect that any unfavorable
developments will be overcome and that this program will at least
re-gain its previous level of listeners. Typical themes included
discussions of Cuba's housing problem, its actual sugar production
measured against Castro's earlier claims of what the production
would be, breakdowns and stoppages at the Cuban refineries, activ-
ities with the Soviet Union and the world sugar market, reporting
the progress of the Venezuelan dock workers boycott of ships of
those nations that also trade with Cuba, the fight against bureau-
cracy, and economic aspects of the Middle East crisis.
3. A main AMSCROLL effort continued to be an analysis of the
current sugar crop. As early as 13 February AMSCROLL predicted a
harvest within the range of 6,100,000 and 6,400,000. By 6 May
AMSCROLL was able to refine the harvest estimate from 6,047,000 to
6,101,000 tons. This estimate was further pinpointed to 6,100,000
tons in a release dated 16 June. These studies received newspaper
attention and AMSCROLL has received favorable comment from sugar
brokers and other technicians engaged in this business. As events
-
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_201.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
13
- 3
En relación con el estado de la industria azucarera en la actualidad es no-
cesario comenzar por esbozar la situación en la que se centron los truenius.
--Debido-a-la-escasez-de-niezas de repuesto, la falta de materiales y la baja call
dad del trabajo, los ingenios confrontan una situación que es necesario califi
car de "caótica". La falta de personal técnico capacitado y de obreros especia-
lizados hacen que la operación de producción de los ingenios sea altamente defi-
ciente. Por otra parte, la falta de abastecimiento de caña no permite que los in
génios funcionen a su capacidad normal, trayendo como consecuencia poca eficien-
cia en el trabajo y un alto consumo de combustible adicional, que ocasiona un ay
mento considerable en los costos de producción del azúcar. En relación con los
medios de transporte, principalmente los ferrocarriles azucareros, deseamos acla
rar que se encuentran también on pésimas condiciones, a pesar de la adquisición
de locomotoras soviéticas, inglesas y francesas, pues las vías férreas no permi-
ten el aprovechamiento de este material rodante. Por ejemplo, durante 1965 se
debían de haber cambiado seis millones de traviesas en las vías férreas, mas sin
embargo sólo había diponibles ochenta mil. El resultado es el incremento de los
descarrilamientos que durante la zafra de 1965 alcanzaron un promedio de tres des
cärrilamientos diarios, produciéndose diez accidentes mortales.
Muchos me preguntan cual será la producción final de la zafra de 1966 y so -
bre este punto debo hacer los comentarios siguientes: Fidel Castro anunció que
la meta azucarera de este año serían 6.5 millones de toneladas y ese anuncio no
sólo fue hecho durante su discurso del lro. de mayo de 1955, sino que lo repitió
durante su discurso del 7 de junio del mismo año. Sin embargo, se admite que di
cha metá no será alcanzada. Ahora bien el estimado actual no excede de 5.1 mi-
$
llones de toneladas. ¿Por qué?
Primeramente se debe mencionar la falta de abono. Este año la aplicación
de abono fue insignificante, pues el gobierno no tenía las divisas necesarias pa-
ra adquirirlo, principalmente en Italia. El año pasado, sin embargo, se aplica-
•
:
1
I
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_203.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
-
dad de producción azucarera que Cuba tenía hace quince años.
->
El segundo punto, que en cierto sentido debe atemberarse al primere, es am--
pliar la capacidad industrial instalada y además construir_un_nuevo ingenic. Esto
significaría, o sea, para alcanzar esto sería necesario la importación de un núme
maro considerable de equipos para los ingenios, cosa totalmente imposible de lle-
varse a cabo debido a la escasez de divisas -de por of escasas para la adquisición
de piezas de repuesto y la falta de técnicos para hacerse cargo de supervisar y
ejecutar dicha ampliación también se debe decir que tampoco son suficientes los
1
técnicos para realizar de por sí las labores ordinarias de la zafra con la actual
capacidad. Este parte del plan supone una coordinación entre el INRA
que siem-
bra la caña y el-MTNAZ, pero lo que sucede en la realidad es que no están en
coordinación ambos organismos y por consiguiente el INRA manda a sembrar caña en
donde no existe canacidad industrial y por su parte 61 MINAZ está "rehabilitando"
ingenios en donde a lo mejor ya no hay suficiente caña. Esto es sólo una muestra
de la desorganización reinante, desorganización que unida a los factores menciona
dos imposibilitan el éxito del "Plan Perspectivo". Esto es una prueba más la
incapacidad de la planificación económica de las altas esferas en dicho gobierno.
->>>
(Por cierto que la construcción del nuevo ingenio es vital para el éxito del
"Plan" y hasta el momento presente sólo una firma francesa ha hecho ofertas para
dicha construcción, dicha firma es nada menos que la FIVES-LILLE, bien conocida
en los círculos azucareros).
La tercera fase del "Plan", es decir, la "concentración" de la capacidad in--
dustrial azucarera en setenta ingenios después de 1970 es sólo un sueño en la men
te de los planificadores. La regresión constante de la industria azucarera no
puede permitir, económicamente hablando, el modernizar y automatizar plantas y
equipos, hasta que los problemas económicos básicos de la producción no estén re-
sueltos.
4
Los equipos soviéticos no son aptos para realizar estas tareas agrícolas en
Cuba y su diseño y difícil operación impiden que cumplan su cometido. Además es
tas "cortadoras" introducen un 19% de materias extrañas en el ingenio, lo cual
ocasiona gran desgaste a las máquinas y equipos del ingenio. Y es precisamente
con estos equipos soviéticos con los cuales se contaba para cosechar 83 millones
de toneladas de caña que serían necesarias para producir los 10 millones de tone-
ladas de azúcar anunciados por Fidel Castro como los "10 megatones de azúcar” con
los que iba a derrotar al "imperialismo" en 1970.
Las metas de producción del "Plan" son las siguientes: Para 1965: 6 millones
de toneladas, para 1966; 6.5 millones: para 1967: 7.5 millones. para 1968: 8 mi--
llones para 1969; 9 millones: y finalmente, para 1970: 10 millones de toneladas
"
+
1
7
:
1
"
* OLLEETJE KSIDHULEN & ON SUNDRISA 1930 1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_205.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
r
CURRICULUM VITAE
Nombre: RAUL ESPARZA“ TABARES
Casado
Fdad: 46 años
Información Profesional:
Quimico Industrial (1938).
Ingeniero Quimico Azucarero (1943)
* `Ingoniero Agrónomo (1943)
*
Jefo de la Dolegación Cubana a la Conferencia Internacional de Expertos
.Azucareros de la F10 (Naciones Unidas) celebrada en Londres, Inglaterra
dol lro. al 3 de marzo de 1966.
Director de Investigaciones Tecnológicas del Ministerio do Azúcar (MINAZ)
de Cuba (1964-1966).
# Miembro de la "Comisión del Plan Perspectivo Azucarero" de Cuba (1963-1966)
Jofe Nacional do Producción del Ministerio de Azúcar (MINAZ) do Cuba (1961-
1963).
Auxiliar Ingeniero Asesor Alfred L. Webre (1950–1960).
Superintendente de Fabricación del Central "Santa Lucia", Oriente, Cuba,
(1949–1961).
" Jefe de Laboratorio del Central "Narcisa", Las Villas, Cuba (1943-1947).
Jefe del Departamento Quimico de la Estación Experimental de Santiago de
las Vegas, Habana, Cuba, (1948-1949).
Miembro del "International Society of Sugar Cane Technologists (1963).
* Vice-Presidente de la "Asociación de Técnicos Azucareros Cubanos" (1966).
Ex-Presidente del "Rotary Club" de Santa Lucia, Oriente, Cuba.
#
Profesor de la Facultad de Tecnologia de la Universidad de La Habana, Cuba
(1964-1966).
Asesor Técnico de la Biblioteca Nacional de Cuba (1963-1966).
Autor de varios artículos técnicos azucareros publicados en revistas azuca
reras cubanas e internacionales.
}
$
J
1"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_204.jpeg ---
14-00000
100=YRON 15 PLA, NEMORATA ESIMPTOME VIELĀ NODRO
**
1.
de azúcar. Estimo que el único en Cuba que aún cree en el "Plan" y en sus metas
es Fidel Castro.
-
Me gustaría hacer una breve referencia en relación con otro problema básico
la baja calidad del azúcar cubano, tanto crudo como refino, actualmente en proce
so de empeorarse. Esto no ha sucedido de casualidad sino como consecuencia de la
falta y mala calidad de las piezas de repuesto, la ineficiencia en la operación de
los ingenios, la falta de eficiencia de los trabajadores, y la baja calidad de los
productos químicos auxiliares procedentes de países socialistas. Estos problemas
están resultando en una decreciente polarización del azúcar, el envase deficiente
del azúcar de exportación, el aumento de impurezas en el azúcar embarcada a granel,
y las dificultades en cumplir los compromisos de entregas de azucares.
Otro tema de interés lo constituye la presencia de los "técnicos azucareros"
soviéticos en Cuba. El régimen cuenta en la actualidad con unos 300 técnicos azu-
careros soviéticos quienes se supone que sean los sustitutos de los técnicos cuba-
nos que han abandonado el país. Los técnicos soviéticos tienen muy poca experien-
cia en azúcar de caña y la forma en que dicha industria opera en Cuba. Además muy
pocos hablan español y esto les hace aún más difícil su labor. Por lo tanto ni los
técnicos soviéticos ni los equipos soviéticos constituyen una solución para el que
bradero de cabeza azucarero de Fidel Castro.
Con esto deseo dar por terminada estas declaraciones. Dejo ahora la palabra a
los miembros de la prensa para contestarles cualquier pregunta en relación, no só-
lo`a mis palabras, sino a la situaci ón política interna que es un interesante feng
meno de desintegración, la odisea de mi familia, el problema de la Universidad en
donde desempeñaba una cátedra, así como cualquier otro tema que resulte de interés.
Muchas gracias.
1
:
Miami, 5 de Abril de 1966.
:
3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_206.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
INFO.
CLASSIFICATION
PROCESSING
SECRET
PHO
POSED:
ACTION
TECOM.
ISHED
XX
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED,
HEADQUARTERS DESK
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE BPV
SUBJECT TYPIC/MHVIPER/AMRAIN/Answer to questionnaire from
Professor Torsten Gardlund
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
ACTION REQUIRED: Headquarters' Approval Requested per Paragraph 2.
REFERENCES:
A. DIRECTOR-05058
B. STOCKHOLM-7068
-192515
1. Per reference A we forward by separate cover the draft of the
proposed AMRAIN-1/AMFRAME-1 answer to the questionnaire sent AMRAIN-1
by Professor Torsten Gardlund requesting information on the Cuban sugar
industry. The time was taken to prepare these answers carefully and
to provide additional information of Cuban sugar export commitments in
order to point up the problems facing the regime in reaching its 1970
goal. In addition, we hope that an exchange of correspondence will
ensue as Professor Gardlund could be a useful European contact for
AMSCROLL.
:
2. Please cable Hoadquarters comments. The station is retaining
the originals which need only to be dated and signed prior to mailing.
We shall pouch COS, Stockholm a copy of what we mail Professor Gardlund.
All
Nig/FI
ABSTRACT
Rose & marchand
for Philip G. ELMARD
17-120-26/3 AMSCROLL
PROP
19-120-26
Attachments: use (aad)
1. Letter from AMRA IN−1
2. Answer to Questionnaire
with Appendix I
3. Letter from AMFRAME-1
Distribution:
(3- WH/C, w/atts. usc;
3000.
LAUWP 1
Ficluded on ma
-
1802
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DATE TYPED
21 June 66
DATE DISPATCHED
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-25367
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
JUN 2 4 1966
19-120-26/3
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_202.jpeg ---
14-00000
1 %
J
ron aproximadamente 450,000 toneladas.
En segundo lugar, resulta necesario hacer referencia à las siembras de caña.
Las nuevas areas sembradas de caña lo han sido de forma deficiente y además se han
utilizado areas destinadas con anterioridad a la siembra de otras cosechas para-
sembrar caña, como lo constituye, por sólo citar un ejemplo, el caso_de_la_zona.
situada en los alrededores de Manzanillo y Bayamo, las cuales eran zonas arroce -
ras y ahora han intentado convertirlas en zonas cañeras, resultando todo esto en
un fracaso pues la caña es de baja calidad al no ser adecuado el suelo..
Otro fac
tor menos importante pero digno de darse a conocer es la falta de cuidado en las
tareas de cultivo y atención de los cañaverales debido a la escasez de mano de g
bra.
Con estos antecedentes es que hay que analizar el monto de la presente zafra.
Durante 1965 el día 7 de abril se alcanzó el cuarto millón, pero este año el ter-
cer millón se alcanzó el día 3 de abril lo cual ya significa un atraso de cerca
de 900,000 toneladas. Creo que hay caña para llegar a 5.1 millones de toneladas
ahora bien, lo que hay que preguntarse es si dicha meta, que ya está bastante por
debajo de los 6.5 millones anunciados por Fidel Castro será alcanzada o no.
o no. El
Partido está realizando una movilización masiva record hacia los cañaverales con
el propósito de intentar cortar toda la caña pero eso hay que ver si en defini-
tiva lo bgraǹ hacer.
Cabe hacer referencia en este momento a lo que se conoce en Cuba por el nom
bre de "Plan Perspectivo Azucarero", que es el único plan económico que tiene en
estos momentos el gobierno de Cuba.
¿Qué es el "Plan Perspectivo Azucarero"? comprende tres puntos básicos que
son los siguientes: primero, la "rehabilitación" de la capacidad industrial a ni
veles pre-Castro, segundo, la "ampliación” de la capacidad industrial, y tercero,
la "concentración" de la industria azucarera en 70 modernos centrales.
Vamos a revisar brevemente los tres puntos a la luz de la presente situación.
En relación con el primero, o sea, la "rehabilitación" de la capacidad industrial
instalada, es necesario destacar que en 1952 la capacidad de producción de la in
dustria azucarera era de siete millones de toneladas, pero debido a la escasez
de piezas de repuesto, falta de materiales para las reparaciones, baja calidad de
las reparaciones y la eliminación de seis ingenios que fueron precisamente des
mantelados para utilizar las piezas como repuestos lo cual se ha comprobado ha si
do un error más la capacidad industrial se ha reducido a sólo seis millones de
toneladas, es decir, que la actual política ha resultado en la presente merma de
la producción iqué progreso! Fidel Castro no ha podido ni alcanzar la capaci
->>>
-
-
"
i
i
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_208.jpeg ---
14-00000
QUESTIONNAIRE FOR-PROFESSOR FORSTNGARLUND
EVINSKA_COCKURDUURIKE AKTIEBOLAGET
1.- TECHNICIANS IN GUÌVÂN SUGAR INDUSTRIES:
Before Castro:
In 1966
400
50
2.- TRAINING OF GURAN FUGAR TECHNICIANS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF HAVANA:
Before Castro:
In 1966
Agricultural Engineer
(4 years)
fugar Chemical Engineer
(5 years)
Sugar Chemist
(3 years)
Agricultural Enginoer
(5 years)
QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO A POSSIBLE SWEDISCH-CUNAN LONG TERM SUGAR AGREEMENT
A.- Present Cuban export arrangementat
1.- Total Exports:
4,880,000 MT (1966 sugar commitments)
II.- Thereof under long/term aureomentat
(*)
Country ____
Eastern Europe
Spain
Quantity
600,000.0 MT
130,000.0 MT
Price
Number of Years
Marocko
270,000.0 MT
Free Mkt.
2.5 ots. lb.
L.D.P.
On a yearly basis
1966
1966
!
Egypt
100,000.0 MT (ost.)
Free Mkt.
1966
Syria
30,000.0 MT (est.)
Free Mkt.
1966
(*).- Breakdown of Eastern Europe and additional information enclosed in Appendix I.
B.- Pacts about the Cuban mugar production'
I.- Productiont
1966
1970
(planned)
a.- Acreage under cane acre, cab.
3,979,440 acres
b.- Expected cane crops in ton/
acro arr/cab.
994,860 acres
4,642,680 acres
1,989,720 aorės
c.- Expected cane crop in tons
d.- Expected sugar production in
tons
37,500,000.0 MT :
4,500,000.0 MT(*)
83,000,000.0 MT
10,000,000.0 MT
0.- Average sugar content in cane $
f.- Yield sugar in tag/ton cane &
slca. 2UFGA-25367
CS COPY¹².00%
}
14.00%
17-120 24.508
12.50-12.60%
Portact

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_207.jpeg ---
14-00000
Profesor Torston Gardlund
Svenska Sockerfabriks Aktiebolaget.
Huvudkontoret
Fost Box 17050
Malmo
Miami, June 10, 1966
S
Sweden.
Dear Prof. Gardlunds
I am pleased to enclose the information that you requested
in your kind letter of 5/5/66, which I hope will be useful to you in your studies
of price and cost trends in the cane sugar industry.
As you probably know, the Cuban sugar industry ranked first
place as a producer of cane sugar, not only with regards to large production vol-
umes, but also as concerns high technical efficiency and low production costs.
Before 1959, the maximum production cost was of 3.5 cents a
pound, excepting, of course, the smaller and more inofficient sugar mills that
had not dovoloped any technological advances since World War II. However, in
1965 the cost of production was as high as 5.25 cents a pound, even though, of
course, this latter figure is carefully concealed by the Communist régime that
rules my country.
I would like to acquaint you with the Economic Research Bu-
reau of the UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA Movemont. This organization is made up of true
Cuban economists in exile. I am sure that you will find this a very valuable
source of information concerning Cuba's economy.
£
I thank you very much for the kind and humane phrases that
you have had for my family and for myself. Thank Heaven, after three long years
we were able to escapo, even if at the risk of our own lives, from the Communist
hell. We have come to this free land in the hope that we can start our lives all
over again under the kind hospitality of this great Nation, the free and democrat
ic United States of America.
Please by assured, my dear Professor, that I am pleased to
place myself at your service. Should you desire any information concerning the
Cuban sugar industry, I will be more than glad to furnish it to you. I also
hope that, very soon, a régime of liberty, justice and democratic economic de-
valopment will prevail in my suffering Fatherland.
Sincerely yours,
Ing. Raul Esparza Sr.
19-120-26
-
slear. 14FGA-25367
CS COPY
:
:
"
1
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_209.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
1066
1979
8.- Number of factories operating,
raw sugar
152
153
h.- Totally installed milling on-
pacity, arrobat cane/day (24 hrs) 47,730,000 as 52,100,000 as
one arrota = 25,3525 lbs.
(*) 1966 production will range from 4,450,000.0 MT to 4,500,000.0 MT. Original
goal set by Cuban government was 6,500,000.0 MT.
4,450
4,500,000.0 MT.
II.- Methods to reach the goal for 1970:
a.- Increase in acroago:
acre, ha, oab,
663,240 acres
1.- Increasing procent acreage in:
11.- by replacing with newly planted cans the present fields mintain-
ing an average age of five years for the cans. This means that
each year 20% of the total cane aron must be replaced which stated
in figures means that from 1964 to 1969, a total of 829,050 acres
of new cane will have to be planted a year.
The new plantations up to date have been:
1963
1964
1965
298,458 acros
464,268 acres
563,754 acres
:
b.- Increase in yield ton. of cane/acre
arr. of cane/cat; %
The project has taken into consideration an increase in the yield of
metric tone per hectare from 24.924 MT in 1956 to 49.848 MT in 1970.
This represents a 200% yield increase in only four years.
c.- Increase in yield sugar in bag/ton of cane %1
The project calls for an increase from the 12.0% in 1966 to 12.50 –
12.60% in 1970.
d.- Increase of installed milling capacity in factories,
con/24 hrs.
An increase of 50,300.0 MT of cane/24 hrs., equivalent to 6,300.0 MT
of sugar/24 hrs. is planned.
8.- Increase in days of zafra'
The days of zafra (harvest) will increase from 120 to 140 days,
-

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_210.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
:
3
f.- Number of new factories:
A new sugar mill in programmed for 1970. This new mill will have a
capacity of 13,800.0 MT of sugar cane per 24 hours and a total pro-
duction of 20,000.0 MT of rugar in 120 effective days of safra.
III.- Fertilizera'
a.- Import of fertilizerss
1965
450,000.0 MT
1970
(planned)
400,000.0 MT
-
450,000.0 MT of fertilizers
The plan calle for the use of 400,000.0
for the following years: 1965, 1966, 1967, 1960, 1969 and 1970.
b.- Domestic production of fertilizor: 50,000.0 MT
100,000.0 MT
IV.- Cost of production'
a.- Rav sugart
1965
pesos par
ton sugar
1970-
(planned)
Raw materials incl. cane
45.00
Cost of production ex factory
excl. of depreciation and interest
(excl. raw materials and cane)
51.00
Depreciation
-
interest
21.00
by-products
2.00
115.00
= price ex factory
b.- Refined sugar:
Price ex factory
+ marketing costs and profits
= retail price
0.- Cane:
1965'
pesos per lbs.
0.0625
0.0175
c.C800
Average price of cane at factory:
6.00 pesos per 1.15 MT of sugar
cane.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET
are turning out, these estimates appear to have been sound in-
deed. The AMHIM bulletin continues to give good replay to those
studies which results in their dissemination throughout Latin
America.
4.
AMSCROLL continued with its monthly release which lists
the Free World ships that trade with Cuba. Both AP and AFP con-
tinued to file this information which results in its being pub-
lished in the press and used on radio news broadcasts.
5. AMSCROLL continued its mailing program to Cuba, and
during this quarter mailings approximated 5,000 which is the samo
level as the previous quartor.
B.
ADMINISTRATION
6. The amount budgetod for the quarter under review was
$33,500.00 of which $13,332.45 was spent. This significant do -
cline in expenses was in large part due to the savings caused
by the cancellation of the AMTHIGH radio program and by continuod
attention to economies of operation within AMSCHOLL itself.
C.
PROBLEMS
7. The Station is not aware of any specific problems having
to do with the AMSCROLL organization. Mention might be mado in
passing of the ever present morale problem (which is by no means
limited to AMSCROLL) engendered by increasing economies and re-
strictions in operations.
D. PLANS FOR THE NEXT QUARTER
8. A major effort is being made to revamp the AMSCROLL radio
program to increase its effectiveness as a reporter of economic
developments of interest to the Cuban listener. Too often these
programs spill over into the field of political reporting or unin-
formed comment upon developments in economic areas of which the
script writers are largely ignorant. Our aim is to devise a pro-
gram of economic reporting that will conform to the new guidelines
being developed by the Station for all its radio programs.
T
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_211.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
=
*
1
d.- Labour:
Average working minutes per ton sugar produced
(or per ton cane cruched)
Average labour wage per 8 hrs.
'‘8.- Methods of depreciation'
30.00 metric tons of sugar per
minute,
6.50 pesos per man.
$ for
{
÷
On original value
On recovery value
$ for
buildings
(average
mchinery
(average)
20
10
1
$7
T
:
I
7
#

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_213.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
:
2
-
"
(1) Fulsaria: 180,000.0 MT
180,000.0 MT for 1966 at current free market prices under harter
agreements in exchange for Bul-arian electrical and industrial equipments
and plants. A 1967-1970 agreement calls for an increase in deliveries to
200,000.0 MT.
(2) Czechoslovakia:
200,000 MT
200,000 MT for 1966 at current free market prices under bar
ter agreement originally rigned in June 1960 and revised during 1965.
(3) East Germany: 220,000.0 MT for 1966 at current free market prices under bar-
ter agreement signed early in 1965 which calls for an increase in Cuban sugar
deliveries on a yearly basis until 1970.
(4) USER' 3,000,000.0 VT for 1966 at an original price of 6 cts. per lh, which
is considered to be at the present time of 5 cte, per lb. under the January 20,
1964 barter agreement. Cuban rugar deliverios will increase as follows:
1
}
1967:
4,000,000.0 MT
1968:
4,000,000.0 MT
1969:
5,000,000.0 MT
1970:
5,000,000.0 MT
( -5) Communist Ching: 600,000.0 MT under barter agreement in exchange for rice,
foodstuffs, and machinery.
( 6)
North Korea and North Viet Nam:
(7)
ANAL
Estimates.
Spain: 130,000.0 MT for 1966 at a new price of 2.5 cts. per lb. under the new
trade agreement for 1966-1969 compared to 5.0 cte. per lb. paid by Spain under
the previous agreement. Cuban sugar and tobacco will be exchange for Spanish
vegrele, vehicles, electrical equipment and intustrial plants, foodstuffs (wine,
brandy, nougat, oil), and textiles. Cuban sugar deliveries for the period
(1966-1969) will be:
1966:
130,000.0 MT
1967
140,000.0 MT
1968:
150,000.0 MT
1969:
160,000.0 MT
( 8) Morocco: 270,000.0 MT for 1966 at L.D.P. 35% of 1966 deliveries will be paid
+
in convertible currencies. Cuban sugar deliveries will increase to 295,000.0 MT
in 1967.
( 9) Exempt: 100,000.0 MT for 1966 at free market prices. Agreement originally signed
(9)
in October 1959 for an indefinite period of time.
(10) Exria: 30,000.0 MT for 1966 at free market prices. No other details available.
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_214.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1
LETTFRITAD "CONOMIC INTELLIGENCE FORT.
Miami, June
1956
Prof. Torsten Garlund
-
SVENSKA FOCKERFABRIKS AKTIEBOLAGET
Huvudkondoret
Box 17050
Malmo 17, Sweden.
Dear Prof. Carlund:
We had the opportunity of cooperating with Ing. Rail Espar
za in filling out the questionnaire you enclosed with your My 5, 1966 letter.
The "Economic Research Bureau" is a branch of UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA, which is
an oxilo Cuban organization born in the underground and presently fighting to
free our Homeland, both inside Cuba and in exile.
One of our weapons in this effort is what we have labeled
as an economic offensive to deny the Castro regime the hard currency it so des
parately needs. For this reason the "Economic Research Bureau" was organised.
It puts a monthly economic newsletter, the "Economic Intelligence Report", and
whatever other information we feel will alt our caure and at the same time pro
vide accurate and reliable data to Free World countries and firms that still
consider trading with the procent Cuban regime.
Enclosed you will find some of our past newsletter which we
expect will be of interect to you. At the same time, they will serve you as an
example of the type of research work we have undertaken, its objectivity, and
its accuracy.
It was our pleasure to corperate with Ing. Esparza in fil-
ling out the questionnaire you rent and we avail ourselves for any additional
information you could desire in the future, besides placing you in our regular
mailing list.
Very rincerely yours,
<
PRV/
s/care. 3uFGA-25367
CS COPY
Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vazques
Director UR's
Economic Research Bureau
0 3
L
0-120-55
19-120-26 we want
whitat
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_212.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
Country
Eastern Europe
AP:E'DIX I
BREAKDOWN OF EASTERN FUROPEAN COMMITMENTS
AND ADDITIONAL INTIMATION & CUBAN SUGAR
EXPORT CONTINENTS. CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION.
Quantity
Price
Number of years
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia.
East Germany
180,000.0 MT
Free Mkt.
1966 (1)
200,000.0 MT
Free Mkt.
1966 (2)
220,000.0 MT
Free Mkt.
1966 (3)
U.S.S.R.
Communist China
3,000,000.0 MT
5. cts. lb.
1966 (4)
600,000.0 MT
1966 (5)
North Korea and
1
North Viet Nam
Spain
1
Morocco
30,000.0 MT
130,000.0 MT
270,000.0 MT
1966 (6)
2.5 cts. lb.
1966 (7)
L.D.P.
1966 (8)
Egypt
fyria
100,000.0 MT
30,000.0 MT
Free Mkt.
1966 (9)
Free Mkt.
1966(10)
Other free world
commitments
120,000.0 MT
Total Export Commitments:
4,880,000.0 MT
Domestic Consumption:
Total 1966 Commitments:
£50,000.0 MT
5,330,000.0 MT
>
1966 Sugar Production:
4,500,000.0 MT
Possible 1965 standover:
Sugar available for 1966:
Deficit:
:
_500,000.0 MT
5,000,000.0 MT
330,000.0 MT
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_215.jpeg ---
14-00000
DISPATCH
TO
Chief, WH
i
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
INFO
FROM
Chief of Station, Bogota
Chief of Station, JMWAVE BPV
SUBJECT TYPIC/MHVIPER/AMSCROLL
T">
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
BP✓
ACTION. REQUIRED:
None; FYI
PRO
POSED
PROCESSING
ATKA
ALLOM
PISHED)
XX
MARALD FOR INDESING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
REFERENCE: UFGW-6034
1. Station JMWAVE appreciates the reference and in implementation
thereof AMFRAME-1 has written Jaime Lozano of the Colombian National
Association of Sugar Cane. Growers as suggested in paragraph 1 of the
reference. AMFRAME-1 also enclosed certain statistics developed by
AMSCROLL which we hope will be of use to Lozano. Copies of the lettor
and of the translation are forwarded by separate cover.
2. We shall keep the addressees informed of any developments.
Attachments:
1-Letter
usc (374)
Roger E. Marchbank
for Philip G. ELMARD
2-Memo of Statistics
Distribution:
(3- WH/C, w/atts. usc
2- COS/Bogota, w/atts
2- C/WH, w/o atts.
CASP 1
Exchi stomato
34
OFFERENCE TO
8/3/25/
200-120-58
CLASSIFICATION
CS COPY
CATE TYPED
SECRET
17 June 66
DATE DISPATCHED
JUN 21 1566
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-25349
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
♦ 19-120-26/3
:
:
ó

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_217.jpeg ---
1
:
14-00000
:
}
:
:
:
:
Así mismo agradeceríamos que si Uds. tienen alguna publicación
de su Asociación que nos pudieran enviar con regularidad nos la hicieron llegar y
si logró utilizar las declaraciones del Ing. Esparza y del Dr. Tarrab en algún ag
tículo nos interesaría obtener alguna copie.
Esperando tener noticias suyas y seguros que cualquier gestión
suys representará una victoria tento para Colombia como para los cubanos libres, que
damos de Ud.,
Muy atentamente,
=
Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vasquez
Secretario de Sectores
Económicos y Profesionales
P.D. Díganos si está recibiendo con regularidad nuestras informaciones.
RRV/amb.
I
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_218.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
!
:
1
i
MEMORANDUM
AL, Sr. Jaime Lozano
Presidente,
Asociación Nacional de
Cultivadores de Caña de Azúcar,
Cali, Colombia.
DEL: Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vézquoz
Secretario de los Sectores
Reonómicos y Profesionales,
Unidad Revolucionaria,
Miami, Florida,
1
REF.: Andlisis Estadístico de los compromisos
azucareros do Cuba para 1966. La pro-
ducción y los mercados de España, Marns
cos y Japón.-
CUADRO NO. 1
COMPROMISOS AZUCAREROS DE CURA PARA 1966
1.- En base de acuerdos existentess
A) Países Comunistas,
U.R.S.S.I
Bloque Comunista,
ists
China Rojas
3,000,000 TM
690,000
600,000
Corea del Norte
y Viet Nam del Norte,
B) Países del Mundo Libre*,
2.- Consumo Doméstico,
30,000
4,320,000 TM
650,000
650,000 TM
450,000
1,000
450,000 TM
-
TOTAL,
5,420,000 TH
(*) Estimado conservador de compromisos con países tales como España, ·
Marruecos, Ceylon, la República Arabe Unida y otrcs.-
CS COPY
;
__
I
-

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_216.jpeg ---
"K
14-00000
1
Mami, 13 de Junio de 1966
6
:
1
Sr. Jaime Lozano
Presidente,
Asociación Nacional de
Cultivadores de Caña de Azúcar
Edificio Suramericana de Seguros
Calle 12, Carrera Sa, 10g piso,
Cali, Colombia.
Estimado Sr. Lozanot
1
F
Nos dirigimos a W, en esta oportunidad con motive del fracaso
de la presente zafra azucarera cubans, fracaso del cual Ud. ya debe tener noticias,
no solo a través de nuestra hoja da información económica ("Economic Intelligence
Report") sino a través de fuentes propias,
Por ejemplo, el boletín de la casa Morril-Lynch de fecha 10 de
Junio de 1966 fija ol monto de la presente zafra cubana ən 4,450,000 TM, es decir,
mas de dos millones de toneladas métricas por debajo de la mota anunciada por Fidol
Castro (6,500,000 TM). Esto se traducirá en una escasez que hard muy difícil que
el presente régimen pueda cumplir sus compromisos azucareros con países del mundo
libre tales como España y Marruecos y al mismo tiempo pueda copar un por ciento con
siderable del marcado azucarero del Japón. El memorandum adjunto contiene datos
que le resultarán de interés.
La reciente operación en la cual el Brasil vendió 530,000 TM es
una pruoba palpable de la oportunidad existente para los países libres de la Améri
ca en los actuales momentos debido al fracaso de la zafra cubana.
t
Sería sumamente eficaz para Colombia el explorar las posibilida
des existentes en esos tres mercados de inmediato pues seguramente se podrían realy
zar algunas operaciones que redundarfan on beneficio para su país al mismo tiempo
que bloquearfan operaciones
operaciones del régimen Castro-Comunista de por si difíciles on
ta de la escasez producida por el fracaso de la zafra de 1966,
Es muy posible que nosetros pudiésemos cooperar en este empeño
de Colombia, tanto a través de informaciones que pudiésemos obtener de la situación
de dichos mercados (España, Marruecos y Japón), así como a través de alguna gestión
personal si se nos presentara la oportunidad.
1
-
/
CS COPY
;
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_219.jpeg ---
14-00000
F
CUAPPO ND, 2
1
1
DEFICIT AZICARERO CIRANO PAHA 1966
1.- Azúcar necesaria para cubrir compromisos de acuerdo con Cuadro No. 1, 2,420,000.IN
2.- Azúcar disponible para 1966;
A) Producción de 1966 (estimado):
B) Sobrante do 1965 (estimado),
TCTAL:
4,450,000 TH
500,000 TV
4,9º9,000 TM
IM
3.- Déficit, (5,420,000 TV - 4,950,000 TM), -470,000 TM
CUADRO NO, 3
BY PORTACIONES DE AZICAR DE CURA A MERCADOS
SELON CADDOC, ESPANA MARRUECOS Y JAPH
(1961
-
1966)
ESPAÑA
HAPEUECOS
JAPON
IOTAL
1961
53,208
157,287
325,000
535,495 TM
1962
58,312
285,124
522,727
846,163 TM
1963
102,737
225,028
163,662
˚551,427 TM
1964
275,704
323,259
328,609
927.572 TM
1965
115,542
300,000
380.000
795,542 TM
TOTAL
1966 (*)
605.503 TH
130,000 TM
1.332.698 TM
1,719,998 TH
3,656,199 TM.
270,000 TM
(hasta el momento
no ge ha cerrado
negociación alguna)
(*) España y Marruecos son compromisos de convenio.
Japón de acuerdo con negociaciones anuales.
Fuentes: "Sugar Year Book" de 1964, Convenios Comerciales de Cuba Comunista
y estimados por el "Buré de Investigaciones Econéricas" de UNIDAD
REVOLUCIONARIA.-
Miami, 14 de Junio de 1966,
f
:
334
1444

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_222.jpeg ---
i
14-00000
:
▾ +
TO,
Sr. Jaime Lozano
President,
National Association of
Sugar Cane Growers
Cali, Colombia.
FROM, Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vázquez
Secretary for
Economic
and Professional Affairs
Unidad Revolucionaria
Miami, Florida.
9
MEMORANDUM
RFF.: Statistical Analysis of Cuban Sugar
Commitments, Production, and the
Spanish, Moroccan and Japanese Mar-
kots.
TABLE NO. 1
CURAN SUCAR COMMITMENTS FOR 1966
1.- Commitments under existing agreements:
A) Communist Countries:
U.S.S.R.1
Communist Blocs
3,000,000 MT
690,000
Red China●
600,000
North Korea and
North Viet Nam:
30,000
4,320,000 MT
B) Free World Countries*,
650,000
650,000 MT
2.- National Consumption:
450,000
450,000 MT
TOTAL,
5,420,000 MI
(*) Conservative estimate with countries such as Spain,
Morocco, Ceylon, U.A.R., and others.-
1
1
+
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_221.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
Likewise, if you have any publication issued by your Association
that you could mail to us regularly,
would appreciate your doing so, and if
you were able to use the statements by Eng. Esparza and Dr. Tarrab in some arti
cle, we would like ot obtain a copy of it.
Hoping to hear from you soon, and with the certainty that any ag
tion on your part will mean a victory for Colombia as well as for the free Cubans,
we are,
Yours very sincerely,
Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vázquez
Secretary for Economic
and Professional Affairs
P.§.: Please tell us whether you are regularly receiving our publications.
Enel.
RRV/amb
1
1
1
1
1
I
I
:
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_223.jpeg ---
!
14-00000
TAYLE NO. 2
CURAN SECAR DEFICIT
1.- Sugar needed to keep commitment according to Tabla No. 1, 2,420,000 MI
2.- Available sugar for 1966,
A) 1966 Sugar Production (estimate): 4,450,000 MT
B) Carry over from the
1965 harvest (estimate),
TOTAL:
500,000 ST
950,000 T
3.- Deficit, (5,420,000 MT - 4,950,000 (T),
470,000 MT
TAPLE NO. 3
CUPAN SICAR EXPORTS TO SELECTED
MARKETS, SPAIN. MOROCCO AM JAPAN
(1961
-
SPAIN
MOROCCO
1966)
JAPAN
TOTAL
1961
53,208
157,287
325,000
535,495 AT
1962
52,312
265,124
522,727
846,163 MT
1963
102,737
285,028
163,662
551,427 VT
:
1964
275,704
323,259
328,609
927,572 MT
1965
115.542
300.000
380,000
798.542 MT
TOTAL
605.503 MT 1,330,698 MT 1,719,998 MT
3,656,199 MT
1966 (*) Spain and Morocco are commitments under existing agreements.
Japanese market subject to yearly negotiations.
Sources:
❤uşar Year Book of 1964", Communist Cuba's Trade Agreements,
and estimates by U.R.'s "Economic Research Pureau
Miami, June 14, 1966,
:
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_220.jpeg ---
14-00000
Miami, June 13, 1966
3.0,
"
.
et ut fL
A
=
'
Mr. Jaime Lozano
President,
art
" ♫
-
National Association of Sugar
Cane Growers
Edificio Suramericana de Seguro
Calle 12, Carrera 5a
Cali, Colombia.
Dear Mr. Lozano:
**
> <
-
* fi
21
Coincbir as a free may
*
We address you now on account of the failure of the current Cuban
sugar harvest, of which failure you must have heard not ely through our "Eco-
nomic Intelligence Report", but also from your own sources.
For example, the June 10, 1966 Merril-Lynch bulletin, sets the
mount of the current Cuban sugar harvest at 4,450,000 MT, that is, over 2 million
metric tons below the goal announced by Fidel Castre (6,500,000 NT). This will
difficult
result in a scarcity of Cuban sugar, which scarcity will make it very
for the regime to fulfill its sugar commitments to free-world countries, such as
Spain. and Morocco, and at the same time to cope with a significant percentage of
the Japanese sugar market. The enclosed Memo contains data that may be of inte
rest to you.
The recent transactions whereby Prazil sold 530,000 MT is tangible
evidence of the opportunity that existo for free countries in the Americas at
this time, thanks to the failure of the Cuban sugar harvest.
It would be extremely rewarding for Colombia to explore the inng
diate possibilities that eixst in these three markets, as surely some
some transac.
tions could be made that would benefit your country, and which, at the same time,
would' block some of the Castro-Communists' own transactions. The latter are in
themselves difficult because of the scarcity brought about by the failure of the
1966 sugar harvest.
It is quite possible that we could cooperate with this Colombian
endeavor, by informing you of facts we learn concerning the situation in such mag
kets (Spain, Morocco and Japan), markets as well as by any personal undertaking,
which we could be capable of.
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_22.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
UNIDAD Monthly, ISSUE No. 38, June, 1967.-
FRONT PAGE:
1) EDITORIAL:
"The Arab Teaching": Arab proverts show that Arabs are wise. They
were not too wice, however, when they took the Soviets as allies and protectors.
For years, the Russians supplied the arsenal the Arabs were building up to wage
holy war against the tiny Jewish enclave. Furthermore, they reiterated their un-
conditional support to the Arabs. But when the "hour of truth" came, the Israel-
is made piecemeal of the Arabs and their Soviet Military hardware. The Russians
failed to come to the assistance of their allies, and both were ridiculed to the
fullest extent. This should be a lesson for Fidel Castro, who relies on the
Sovists' military junk as much as on their support as "allies".
2) CASTRO HIMSELF PROPITIATES "BUREAUCRATISM*:
After a brief recess caused by the
mobilization in the cane fields, the war of bureaucratiam' was renewed with full
vigor by the Havana régime. Two Ministers were fired, whole Ministries were "ra-
tionalized", and payrolls were trimmed to the core. However, the same régime
that voiced threats of prison terms against those that failed to comply with
anti-bureaucratic instructions, creates new sources of bureaucratism, such as,
for example, the Book Institute and the National Institute for Forestry Develop-
men and Products.
"
PAGE TWO:
1) SUNSHINE, AIR, AND WATER.... BUT NO ECONOMIC SOLUTIONS: The MININDUS Vice-Ministry
for Technical Development has several fantastic projects in hand, such as the har-
nessing of solar energy and of the force of the wind, the employment of energy
from tides in southern Pinar del Rio, and the desalinazation of sea water. But,
on top of their intrinsically fantastic character, these projects are paralyzed
due to the lack of technicians and of technical handbooks.
What great men Marx,
Lenin and Castro! (Based on material by same title in E.I.R.).

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_224.jpeg ---
14-00000
CLASSIKATION
DISPATCH
SEGRE
CRET
TO
CHIEF WH
INFO.
FROM
CHIEF OF STATION, JMWAVE
SUBJĘTYPIC/MHSPAWN
STATUS REPORT RE JMWAVE PSYCH PROJECTS
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
XXX
PROCESSING ACTION
MARPIO FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED DESK
CAN JULGE INDEXING
MICROFILM
'
REFERENCES - A.
DIRECTOR 11606
UFGT-15216
B.
C. JMWAVE 1420
1.. PER REFERENCE A REQUEST PARAGRAPHS BELOW GIVE BRIEF
STATUS REPORT STATION'S MHSPAWN PROJECTS. REFERENCE B SHOULD BE
USED AS SUPPLEMENTAL PAPER IN HEADQUARTERS REVIEW. BASIC PROPA-
GANDA LINES HAVE CONTINUED WITHOUT CHANGE, BUT WITH INCREASED
EMPHASIS ON PERSONAL DENIGRATION AND HARASSMENT OF FIDEL CASTRO AND
ON PROPAGANDA DESIGNED ENCOURAGE MILITARY AND OTHER POWER CENTERS
IN CUBA TO CARRY OUT COUP D'ETAT AGAINST CASTRO. EMPHASIS IN
PROJECT MANAGEMENT HAS BEEN ON CLOSER SCRUTINY AND CONTROL IN
ORDER TO ACHIEVE INCREASED EFFICIENCY AND ECONOMY OF OPERATION.
ONE MARGINAL PROJECT /AMRUSTY/ HAS BEEN TERMINATED AND TWO PROJECTS
/AMSPELL AND AMCROW/ ARE BEING SHARPLY CURTAILED DUE TO MARGINAL
PERFORMANCE. THERE HAS BEEN OVERALL CUTBACK IN DISTRIBUTION
PRINTED PROPAGANDA, ESPECIALLY TO LATIN AMERICA. PROPAGANDA
MAILED TO CUBA HAS PLACED MORE EMPHASIS ON MILITARY TARGET IN
PLACE OF MORE GENERAL PROPAGANDA THEMES TREATED. AMTHIGH RADIO
PROGRAMMING HAS BEEN CUT FROM TWO HOURS DAILY TO ONE AND ONE HALF
THIS SHOULD ACHIEVE REDUCTION OF $60,000 - $70,000 PER YEAR IN
OUR RADIO BUDGET/. HOWEVER RADIO CONTINUES TO BE SINGLE MOST
IMPORTANT MEDIUM FOR HITTING CUBAN TARGET.
2. AMSCROLL. PROJECT CONTINUES BE STATION'S MAIN PROPAGANDA
MECHANISM IN MHVIPER AND DEFECTOR-SURFACING OPERATIONS AS
DESCRIBED IN REFERENCE B. PROJECT PUBLISHES MONTHLY ECONOMIC
BULLETIN IN SPANISH AND, ENGLISH AND UNDERTAKES SPECIFIC ACTIONS
TO DISCOURAGE TRADE WITH CUBA, E.G., IT IS CURRENTLY CORRESPONDING
WITH COLOMBIAN SUGAR GROWERS GROUP IN ATTEMPT ENCOURAGE SALE OF
DISTRIBUTION
BY TAPE
3 - WH/C
CROSS REFERENCE TO
/CONTINUED/
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND HUMBER
UFGT-16628
CLASSIFICATIO
SECRET
DATE
20 JUNE 1966
HOS. FILE NUMBER
:
GROUP 1
Exsisted from ortamate
bugtų at
declassificatie
FLEEINGER SKIN HREZZI

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_225.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
CLASSIFIE&1,8%
"
AND NEMETE IZ
+
SECRET
UFGT-16628 PAGE 2.
COLOMBIAN SUGAR TO JAPAN, MOROCCO AND SPAIN IN COMPETITION WITH
COMMUNIST CUBA. PRODUCES TEN-MINUTE DAILY PROGRAM ON AMTHIGH SIX
DAYS PER WEEK. PERIPHERAL ACTIVITIES SUCH AS EXTENSIVE MAILINGS
TO CUBA HAVE BEEN SHARPLY CURTAILED AND AMSCROLL EXECUTIVE BOARD
HAS BEEN REDUCED FROM 13 TO 3 PERSONS AND PAID EMPLOYEES FROM 21
TO 16 AS OF 1 JULY 1965...
3.
AMWASP-1. SEE REFERENCE B. HE IS A VALUABLE ELEMENT OF
THE AMSCROLL PROJECT AND IS USED IN CONNECTION WITH APPROACHES TO
DEFECTION AND RECRUITMENT TARGETS. WE EXPECT TO TERMINATE HIM
31 DECEMBER 1966.
4. AMFRAME-1. SINGLETON AGENT WHO IS MAIN DRIVING FORCE
BEHIND AMSCROLL OPERATION AND TOGETHER WITH AMASK-1 RUNS AMKNOT
ACTIVITY.
5. AMKNOT. A NEW COMMITTEE FORMED AT HEADQUARTERS REQUEST
AMFRAME-1 AND AMASK-1 ARE WORKING
TO HIT ZRWAGON DEFECTION STARGET.
VERY EFFECTIVELY AS PRINCIPAL AGENTS FOR THIS PROJECT AND LATTER
HAS BEEN ESPECIALLY EFFECTIVE IN SECURING JOBS FOR ZRWAGON
DEFECTORS.
WE EXPECT
6. AMCROW. PROJECT IS BEING SHARPLY CURTAILED.
TO REDUCE BUDGET TO APPROXIMATELY $1,000-1,500 MONTHLY IN FY 67.
PROJECT LACKS AGGRESSIVE PRINCIPAL AGENT, AND THE COMBINATION OF
INTERNAL PERSONNEL PROBLEMS IN AMCROW GROUP AND ITS MARGINAL
PERFORMANCE HAVE LED TO DECISION TO CURTAIL. RADIO PROGRAM ON
JMHOPE WAS TERMINATED 31 MARCH AND AFTER 31 JULY WE EXPECT TO
REDUCE AMCROW PAID STAFF TO THREE PERSONS. WE BELIEVE IT WILL BE
USEFUL TO PRESERVE AMCROW NAME AND CERTAIN AMCROW CONTACTS IN
LATIN AMERICA AND TO CONTINUE AMCROW MAILING OPERATIONS ON MORE
LIMITED BASIS.
OPERATION IS VIEWED AS DEVICE
7. AMMOP.
AMMOP. NO MAJOR. CHANGES.
FOR MONITORING AND INFLUENCING CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENT IN
LATIN AMERICA AND IS OF LONG-TERM INTEREST FOR ITS POTENTIAL AS A
HOWEVER PRINCIPAL AGENT LACKS MANY
POLITICAL FORCE IN CUBA.
QUALITIES NEEDED TO MAKE HIM EFFECTIVE POLITICAL LEADER OR
INTELLIGENCE PRODUCER AND WE ARE ASSESSING OTHER AMMOP MEMBERS AS
POSSIBLE REPLACEMENT. AMMOP YOUTH SECTOR HEADED BY AMCRIB-1
MAINTAINS EXCELLENT CONTACTS WITH ITS COUNTERPARTS THROUGHOUT
HEMISPHERE AND HAS BEEN USEFUL AS PRESS PLACEMENT MECHANISM.
8. AMSTRUT-2. NO CHANGES! SEE REFERENCE 8 FOR PROJECT
DESCRIPTION.
9. AMLIRA. NO CHANGE, SEE REFERENCE B FOR DESCRIPTION OF
MONTHLY MAGAZINE STARTED JANUARY 66 WELL
PROJECT ACTIVITIES.
RECEIVED BY READERS AND EFFORTS TO MAKE MAGAZINE SELF-SUSTAINING
HAVE RESULTED IN PAID ADVERTISEMENTS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS WHICH ARE
EXPECTED TO INCREASE AS MAGAZINE BECOMES MORE WIDELY KNOWN.
AMLIRA GROUP PREPARED TARGET STUDIES ON CUBAN ATHLETES ATTENDING
REGIONAL OLYMPIC GAMES IN PUERTO RICO IN JUNE 1966 AND AMLIRA
AGENTS ARE CURRENTLY WORKING WITH KUBARK TASK FORCE AT PUERTO RICAN
GAMES.
10. AMBASAL-1. NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGES FROM REFERENCE B.
AMBASAL-1 **CARTA CIRCUALR'' NOW SENT ONLY TO CUBA AND MONTHLY
- IN PAST BOTH
BULLETIN SENT ONLY TO INTERNATIONAL ADDRESSEES
AMBASAL-1
PUBLICATIONS HAD BEEN SENT TO CUBA AND TO LATIN AMERICA.
PROGRAM ON AMTHIGH HAS BEEN DROPPED AS OF 1 JUNE BUT CONTINUES ON
JMHOPE ONCE WEEKLY /SUNDAYS/.
11. YOYARD/JMHOPE.
NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGES. MORE EMPHASIS
HAS BEEN PLACED ON NEWS PROGRAMS AS RESULT OF REFUGEE DEBRIEFINGS
JMHOPE NOW GIVES FIVE MINUTE
INDICATING DESIRE FOR MORE NEWS.
NEWS SUMMARIES EVERY HALF HOUR AS COMPARED PREVIOUS HOURLY REPORTS.
MANAGERIAL CONTROL OVER PHILCO TECHREPS AT JMHOPE SITE HAS BEEN
IMPROVED, AND PLANS ARE NOW UNDER WAY FOR CONSTRUCTION OF NEW UNITS
/CONTINUED/
TO REPLACE SUBSTANDARD HOUSING AT SITE.
FORM
8-64 53a
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
(40)
CLASSIFICATION
☐
CONTINUED
PAGE NO

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_23.jpeg ---
:
Ba
14-00000
1
-
· 2 ·
-
}
2) CARTOON: Headline: SCYCOTT OF CURA-TRADING SHIPS TO BE STEPPED UP: Castro faces
a sinking vessel named "Maritime Trade With Ouba" and says: "It seems we have
sprung a leak!"
i
PAGE THREE:
1) MOROCCO SEEN DRIFTING AWAY FROM CUBA: A brief story on the sale to Morocco of
160,000 tons of Brasilian sugar.
r." It seems, we point out, that Morocco is determined
to quit Cuba as a sugar supplier. First she develops her own sugar industry, then
buys from Cuba's competitors. (Bised on a report carried by the E.I.R.).
2) CARTOON: Castro was carrying a bag (The Moroccan sugar market), but stumbled on
his own "Ineptitude and the bag "fell from his hands".
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_229.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Manila
INⒸChief, FE
FROM
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/MIIVIPER/AMSCROLL¯”
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
Ⓒ Forwarding of Economic Intelligence Report
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
REFERENCE:
None; FYI
JMWAVE-1092
Wy/C
PROCESSING
$
ACTICA
ACCOM
PLISHED
i
:
XX
MARKED FOR INDESING
NO INSEVING PEQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
-MICROFILM
1. We forward by separate cover the latest edition of the
ANSCROLL economic report that paragraph 3 of the reference indicated
would be pouched. Copios of this and prior issues as well as supporting
statistical material were given Honorio J. Viray during the visit
described in the reference.
2. This Station will appreciate receiving Manila's overt
mailing address for direct mailing of material similar to this in
the future. JMWAVE's address is Identity.
She
**S
_!
. Philip G. ELMARD
+
Attachments:
use (202)
1. VOL I;No. 10: Economic Intelligence Report
2. Identity (aus)
Distribution:
3- COS/Manila, w/atts. usc
(2) WH/C, w/att. 2 usc
C/FE, w/atts. USC
2
Ulva 1
Excl1.1.7 batamako)
-
-
CROSS REFERENCE TO
LEA
L'S COPY
2012
lar...
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
19-120-26
DATE TYPED
26 May 66
DATE DISPATCHED
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-25198
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
:
19-120-26
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_228.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
1175
+144
1
KÁ
DISPATCH
10 Chief of Station, JMWAVE
INFO
Chief, Far East Division
FROM Chief of Station, Manila
SUBJECT
* CLASSIFICATION
+
SECRET
TYPIC MPSHAWN/Information on Honorio. Viray
ACTION REQUIRED · RES LRENCES
Reference: JMWAVE 1092
Action Required: See Below
File
Free mecrall
PROCESSING ALTARE
ENGERING BUJANO
UBLE
SALISED DESA
CAN ASSE BINGEKING
1. The information which Honorio Viray supplied AMECHOLL
about himself is substantially correct.
HG.
He has been in PEPRIME
for nearly a year on a World Press Institute grant, undergoing
Prior to this
practical training in different periodicals.
grant, he was provincial nows editor of the Manila Tinos.
will probably rejoin the Times on his return to the Pallippines
in July, 1988. He was & Tirector of the National Press Club,
but he was defeated when he ran for reelection in February 1986.
2.
Viray is a native of Tarlac and is about 30 years old.
He studied
He is a graduate of the University of Santo Togas,
for one year in Australia, working with a paper in Brisbane
He is a bachelor. He has no known
while going to school.
leftist sympathies, and he appears to be popular with his
fellow newspapermen.
Assuming
3. Manila Station may be interested in contacting Viray
once he returns to Manila and his job status is certain.
that AMSCROLL will correspond with Viray, as suggested in
reference, we would like to reserve for future determination
a means whereby AMSCROLL could assist in arranging a contact
with a Station officer. The Station anticipates the assignment
here of an officer (Raymond E. ONOFREY) within the next ninety
Ve
days whom we should want to place in contact with Viray.
will forward a dispatch suggesting a contact proposal. when
this becomes appropriate.
Distribution:
2 - COS, JMWAVE
1 - C/FE
CROSS REFERENCE TO
Caroline R. KOCERHAN
L
Jun
6 June 1966
MGS FILE HÆLGESƐ fr
✓ 1968
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
DATE
18451
FPHA
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
50-124-38

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_227.jpeg ---
14-00000
1+
CLASSIFICATION
A
MITCH NO NUMBER
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
22.
SECRET.
UFGT-16628 – PAGE 4.
AMRUBY. NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. SEE REFERENCE B.
PROJECT CONTINUES TO PRODUCE AVERAGE OF ONE PONY EDITION 130,000
COPIES/ EVERY THREE MONTHS FOR MAILING INTO CUBA. AS OF 1 JUNE
TWO OF FOUR AMRUBY-SPONSORED SATIRE PROGRAMS ON AMTHIGH HAVE
BEEN DROPPED.
23. AMICE. NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGES. AMICE CONTINUED EFFECTIVE
BOYCOTT PROPAGANDA OPERATIONS AND SERVED AS A VEHICLE FOR LAUNCHING
THE QUMALT-1 "DOLCE VITA' SERIES. REVIEW OF PROJECT ACTIVITIES
RESULTED IN ECONOMIES ACHIEVED BY MODEST PERSONNEL CUTS, USE OF A
MORE SELECTIVE MAILING LIST AND ELIMINATION OF TWO FOREIGN-
LANGUAGE EDITIONS OF THE MONTHLY AMICE BULLETIN.
24. AMSPELL. AS REPORTED IN REFERENCE B FINANCIAL SUPPORT
TO AMSPELL HAS BEEN CUT SHARPLY AND IS NOW LIMITED TO $1,000
MONTHLY. THIS PROVIDES FUNDS FOR BI-MONTHLY BULLETIN, PRESS
AMSPELL HAS BEEN ACTIVE
RELEASES AND SPECIAL PRINTED PROPARENDA.
IN STATION CAMPAIGNS REGARDING POLITICAL PRISONERS AND LATIN
AMERICAN STUDENT MOVEMENT /CLAE/ AND PRINCIPAL AGENT HAS CONTINUED
TO BE RESPONSIVE TO STATION GUIDANCE.´
*AMNON
25. AMNON. NO MAJOR CHANGES IN PROJECT ACTIVITY.
CARRIED OUT SPECIAL RADIO AND PRESS CAMPAIGN IN CONNECTION WITH
FORTHCOMING CLAE MEETING IN HAVANA. SPECIAL PAMPHLET ON THIS
SUBJECT IS BEING PREPARED BY AMNON FOR PUBLICATION BY AMMIM.
IS ALSO STATION'S MAIN ASSET FOR AMBASE PROGRAM AND HAS TAKEN
OVER AMBASE PERSONNEL FROM TERMINATED AMRUSTY PROJECT.
AMNON
CLASSIFICATION
FORM
4-4 530
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
PHILIP G. ELMARD
CONTINUED
1
1
}
PAGE NO

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_226.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
Atti
tout to
.
SECRET
VFGT÷16628. PAGE 3
12. AMCORE-2. EMPHASIS IN THIS PROJECT IN PAST HAS BEE#
CHIEFLY ON AMCORE-2 DAILY HALF-HOUR PROGRAM ON AMTHIGH AND JOPE.
THESE PROGRAMS CONTINUE, ALTHOUGH REDUCED TO 23 MINUTES DAILY FOR
TECHNICAL PROGRAMMING REASONS. WE ARE EXAMINING POSSIBILITY OF
ADDING MORNING PROGRAM ON JMHOPE TO EXPLOIT HIS HIGH AUDIENCE
RATING AS REFLECTED IN REFUGEE AND JMHOPE REPORTS. WE ARE ALSO
∙ATTEMPTING TO EXPLOIT MORE FULLY AMCORE-2'S AGGRESSIVE PERSONALITY
AND HIS LEADERSHIP POTENTIAL IN EXILE COMMUNITY AND TO EXPAND HIS
ONE
PROPAGANDA EFFORTS BEYOND THE RADIO PROGRAMS NOTED ABOVE.
RESULT OF THIS WAS HIS HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL EFFORT TO ORGANIZE THE
DISPARATE REBEL ARMY ELEMENTS IN A UNIFIED APPEAL TO REBEL ARKE'S
IN CUBA, AS REPORTED IN JMWAVE 1397. HE HAS ALSO ARRANGED FOR
FREE AIR TIME FOR A TWELVE MINUTE DAILY PROGRAM ON STATIONS IN
AND HAS OBTAINED SPACE IN DIARIO
VENEZUELA, PERU AND PANAMA
LAS AMERICAS TO PUBLICIZE LETTERS HE RECEIVES FROM
LATIN AMERICAN LEADERS IN SUPPORT OF THE ANTI-CASTRO CAUSE.
->
13. AMRAPT/AMPALM-4. AMPALM-4 ONE AND ONE HALF HOURS ON
DISTRIBUTION OF PRINTED
JMHOPE HAVE BEEN CUT TO ONE HOUR DAILY.
PROPAGANDA TO LATIN AMERICA HAS BEEN TERMINATED. SELECTIVE
MAILINGS ARE MADE TO CUBA, WITH EMPHASIS ON MILITARY TARGET.
SPECIAL STUDIES BY AMPALM-4 ARE NOW BEING PUBLISHED BY AMHIM IN
PLACE OF TERMINATED AMPALM-4 BULLETIN. AS OF 1 MAY DIRECTION OF
AMTWIST PROGRAM HAS BEEN PLACED UNDER AMPALM-4.
B,
14. AMTWIST. AS NOTED REFERENCE B. THIS PROJECT WAS A
MARGINAL EFFORT DUE LARGELY TO LACK OF AN EFFECTIVE PRINCIPAL
AGENT. THE TWO AMTWIST AGENTS HAVE BEEN PLACED UNDER AMPALM-4'3
DIRECTION AS OF 1 MAY AND ACTIVITY SHOULD BE CONSIDERED A DEVELOP-
MENTAL OPERATION. AMTWIST RADIO PROGRAM IS CARRIED ON AMTHIGH
/TEN MINUTES DAILY/ AND ON JMHOPE /15 MINUTES DAILY/..
15. AMSHADY-1. UNTIL MID-FERUARY 66 AMSHADY PROJECT CON-
SISTED OF RADIO PROGRAM ON AMTUMOR AND JMHOPE AIMED AT EXPOSURE AND
DENUNCIATION OF CUIS: AGENTS INSIDE CUBA. IN FEBRUARY SCOPE OF
RADIO PROGRAM WAS BROADENED TO INCLUDE DETAILED DISCUSSION OF
CUIS ACTIVITIES AND AGENTS IN LATIN AMERICA, AND OCCASIONAL DIS-
CUSSION OF OTHER POLITICAL TOPICS NOT SPECIFICALLY RELATED TO CUIS
TARGET. AMSHADY BOOK. ON. CUIS HAS RESULTED IN WIRE SERVICE REPORTS,
PRESS INTERVIEWS, AND INCREASED PRESS COVERAGE AND LETTERS FROM
AMSHADY AUDIENCE. ARRANGEMENTS HAVE NOW BEEN MADE FOR SALE OF
BOOK IN LATIN AMERICA THROUGH LEGITIMATE COMMERCIAL CHANNELS.
16. AMRAZOR-1. NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. SEE REFERENCE B FOR
DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT ACITIVITES. AMRAZOR HAS BEEN ESPECIALLY.
EFFECTIVE OUTLET FOR OUR INCREASED ACTIVITY AGAINST MILITARY
TARGET AND SEVERAL AMRAZOR ARTICLES ON THIS TARGET HAVE BEEN PUT
IN LEAFLET FORM AND MAILED INTO CUBA.
17. AMLYRIC-1. NO CHANGE.
NO CHANGE. SEE REFERENCE B.
AMSCREAM-1.
18.
NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE.
NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. SEE REFERENCE B.
AMTHIGH PROGRAMMING, HANDLED THROUGH AMSCREAM-1, HAS BEEN REDUCED
FROM TWO HOURS DAILY TO ONE AND ONE HALF HOURS DAILY PER REFERENCE
C.
19. AMRUSTY.
8.
T
TERMINATED 31 DECEMBER 1965. SEE REFERENCE
NO SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. SEE REFERENCE B.
20. AMBASE.
MONTHLY AVERAGE OF MAILINGS INTO CUBA HAVE BEEN REDUCED.
REPORT ON AMBASE STATISTICS WILL BE FORWARDED.
AMHIM. SEE REFERENCE B.
SEPARATE
STATION IS PLACING INCREASING
21.
EMPHASIS ON AMHIM AS MAIN MECHANISM FOR PRESS PLACEMENT AND MASS
AMHIM BULLETIN NOW INCOR-
DISSEMINATION OF PRINTED PROPAGANDA.
PORATES MATERIAL FORMERLY PRODUCED AND DISTRIBUTED BY OTHER
STATION ASSETS SUCH AS AMPALM-4 AND AMBASAL-1.
FORM
8-64 53a
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
(40)
CLASSIFICATION
/CONTINUED/
NUED
CONTINUED

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_230.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
5
=
WAR 1
Excluded from adiszały
Cosagrat.ng and
Ceclassifi
.j
IDENTITY
Miss Grace Holmes
P. O. Box 1767
Coral Gables, Florida
sle
s/cars.
CAT. IMEGA-25198
UFGA-25198
CS COPY
19-120- 26
T

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_233.jpeg ---
7!
NA UMAK
14-00000
INDER: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REP TO FILE NO.
CL
.FIED MESSAGE
B
TOTAL COPIFO
3
FILE RIO ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
SECRET
[RSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
;
"
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
OM
DISSEM by 251
ACTION
INF
WH/C8
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY ☐ TURED
☐ SLOTTER ☐ TUL
UNIT
TIME
FILE VR RI/AN, FE8, DOY, DO/HS, CA2, CA/PROP, CA/04, CI/OPS, CI/OA
SECRET 242313Z CITE JNHAVE 1003
MANILA INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC NNSPAWN
MAVE 0192 (IN 238371
2533843
123843
REF
IDENS:
A.
P.
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
GILBERTO R. ALEMANY, CUBAN TRADE COUNSELLOR, TOKYO, W140
DEFECTED AUGUST 1965..
SECRET
SECRET
BT
• Charta, & dari taiaZO SHADES (TEVENTURASÍLETZTETÉS Gana,10=AMPYPTERER SAIYORENTERALL AG (PH IN AM
1
L

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_232.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
:
1
PACE 2 JMWAVE 1993 SECRET
SECKE1
3. VIRAY SAID HE WISHED STAY IN TOUCH WITH AMSCROLL AND
RECEIVE THEIR PUBLICATIONS. NEXT STEP WILL BE FOR AMSCROLL
TO WRITE VIPAY AFTER HIS RETURN MAILA.
MAILA. REQUEST BY POUCH
TRACES AND ANY SUGGESTIONS MANILA MAY HAVE SINCE OUTLET FOR
AKSCROLL ECONOMIC INFORMATION IN MANILA WOULD BE USEFUL.
1
POUCHING COPY LATEST AMSCROLL ECONOMIC REPORT FOR INFO STATION.
4. INDEX VIRAY.
SECRET
SECRET
PT
NNNN
}
1
i
'
:
"
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_235.jpeg ---
14-00000
ASOCIACION NACIONAL DE CULTIVADORES DL CAÑA DE AZUCAR
EDIFICIO SURAMERICANA
DE SEGUROS
MAS GARA
ine.
CALI
•
COLOMBIA
1
2P
TELEGRAFO: "ABOCAÑA"
APARTADON
AEREO
NACIONAL
TELEFONG
44.48
1
Call, Mayo 2 de 1.966
}
Señor
Director del Economic Research Buroau
Box 3940
Miami (Florida).
MAY 25 1966
Muy estimado amigo:
Por intermedio del Centro de Investigaciones Económicas y Socia
les que funciona on Call, tuvimos la oportunidad de recibir los
Boletines Nos.9 y 9-A do ustedes que contionen las declaraciones
de los señores Esparza Tabares y Tarrab Miranda sobre los prE
blemas económicos de Cuba.
Estas doclaraciones las hemos considerado de la mayor significa
ción y los estamos dando amplia publicidad por medio de uno de “
los Boletines de muestra Asociación que circula tanto entre la in-
dustria azucarera y medios económicos de este país, como en la
prensa y radio nacionales.
•
Esperamos que esta publicidad cuente con el agrado de su organi
zación y mucho apreciaríamos si incluyen el nombro nuestro para
que nos seán enviados, los Boletines o publicaciones de ustedes
que tengan especial relación con las actividades cubanas en maté“
ria de azúcar. Nosotros representamos en Colombia la industria-
aucarera y somos la organisación que integra las actividades de
tan importante sector de nuestra economía.
Les damos nuestras gracias anticipadas por la atención que estas
Kíneas les morescan y los saludamos de la manera más cordial,
Atentos amigos,
ASOCIACION HAL. DE CULTYADORES DE CARA DE ATTOOS
S/C ATTE, TO UFGA 25153.
JL/nc.
CS COPY
Jaime Lozano
Presidente.
19-120-26

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_234.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PRO
PORED
XX
WH//P
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
TO
Chief, WH
INFO.
FROM
Chief of Station, Bogota
Chief of Station, JMWAVE P.Pu
SUBJECT TYPIC/AMSCROLL
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
© Letter from the National Association of Sugar Cane Growers, Cali,
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
For addressees to determine.
Colombia
REFERENCE:
DIR-03229
cit: Colombia
1
Regarding letter from subject, who is the
1. We forward by Separate cover a copy of a letter (with
translation) from Jaime *LOZANO, President of the National Association..
of Sugar Cane Growers of Cali, Colombia that was recently received by
AMSCROLL which was in response to AMSCROLL's mailing the Association the
text of public statement made by AMRAIN-1 and AMSNAKE-1. Needless to
say, AMSCROLL will continue the Association on its mailing list and
has responded to this letter with its own letter of appreciation.
2. It occurs to WAVE that this organization might be useful in
implementing the reference, particularly in view of the fact that
Colombia might have as much as 200,000 tons of sugar available for
export this year (per paragraph 4 of the reference). WAVE will be
happy to undertake any action requested of it by the addressees if this
should be an exploitable lead.
3. There are no WAVE traces for either LOZANO or his organization.
Attachment: USC
ATT'D RIDAN
Letter and translation
Distribution:
(3- WH/C, w/att, use
Rover E. Menentu
for Philip G. ELMARD
engur 1
excluded frem &102115]
declasaltrestig
DATE TYPED
2- COS/Bogota, w/att. usc - To CUT Puch
2- C/WH, w/o att.
-
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CS CUPY
22 c to un/3/100
| Atti
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
MAT AD 1965
16 May 66
19-120-26
DATE DISPATCHED
MAY 18 1956
DISPATCH.SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-25153
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_231.jpeg ---
14-00000
FE
..
☑
49.4 ****
MAN MU* * * K417243
L
FROM
C.
SIFIED MESSAGE B
TOTAL COPIES
LE NO.
SECRET
CRCUP +
SH
RET. TO BRANCH ☐
-
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
☐ SIG.
Dissem by 25/3
ACTION
"WH/C 8
21.18.
ADVANCE COPY
3
E
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
• CA-EN
• MO
☑ RID COPY ☐ . ☐ SLOTTEO ☐ TURCO
UNIT
TIME
• 05
SE
Cor
D
FILE VR/RI/AN, FE8, 004, DO/H3, CAZ, CA/PROP, CA/04, C1/OPS, CI/A
SECRET 2403132 CITE UN AVE 1092
230
23836
MANILA INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC MHSPAWN
1. ON 19 MAY MR. HONORIO 1. VIRAY CALLED UPON KUBARK
CONTROLLED ANSCROLL (IDEN A) SEEKING INFORMATION ON CUBA
REFUGEE PROFLENS AND ECONOMIC PRCSLENS FACING CURA. SAID
HE EMPLOYED BY MANILA TIMES AND CURRENTLY DIRECTOR OF
NATIONAL PRESS CLUS OF PHILIPPINES, IN STATES WITH GROUP
15 OTHER NEWSMEN STUDYING WAR ON POVERTY AND THAT HE
BECAME INTERESTED IN REFUGEES WHILE PASSING THROUGH
MIAMI. SAID WOULD USE INFORMATION ON REFUGEES IN ARTICLES.
HE WILL PREPARE FOR TIMES AFTER RETURN ILA IN JULY.
i
2. ANSCROLL BRIEFED VIRAY 22 AND 21 HAY ON CASTRO'S SUGAR.
DIFFICULTIES INCLUDING PROBLEMS JAPAN HAVING IN DEALING WITH CUSA.
AMWASP-1 (IDEN 5) MADE AVAILABLE FOR INTERVIEW 22 MAY WHO MADE POINT
JAPAN IS NATURAL MARKET FOR PHILLIPPINE SUGAR.
NOTES AND ACCEPTED DOCUMENTATION OF STATEMENTS.
VIRAY TOOK EXTENSIVE
HE ALSO BRIEFED
ON RASH OF CUBAN MERCHANT MARINE DEFECTIONS AND MEANING OF
THIS, TO CASTRO AND AMSCROLL ARRANGED FOR YIN TO NEFT A FORNER
SHIP CAPTAIN "NO DEFECTED (QUSAILOR 13).
WHO
SECRET
J
*

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_236.jpeg ---
14-00000
Translation;
Director
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SUGAR GROWERS
-
CALI, COLOMBIA
Cali, May 2, 1966
Economic Research Bureau
Box 3940,
Miami (Florida).
My very dear friend,
Through the Center for Economic and Social Research that operates an Cali, we had
the opportunity to receive your Bulletins Nos. 9 and 9-A, which contain the state-
ments made by Mssrs. Esparza Sabares and Tarrab Miranda regarding the economic pro-
blems of Cuba.
We have considered these statemonts of the utmost significance, and we are giving
them wide publicity through one of the Bulletins of our Association that circulates
among the sugar industry and the economic circles of this country as well as among
the national press and radio.
We hope that this publicity will be to the liking of your Organization and we
would appreciate it very much if you would include our name so that we are sent those
of your Bulletins or publications that are especially related to Cuban activities in
matters of sugar. In Colombia, we represent the sugar industry and we are the organ-
ization that integrates the activities of such an important sector of our economy.
We thank you in advance for your kind attention to these lines and convey to you
our most cordial greetings.
Your friends,
NATIONAL ASSN. OF SUGAR CANE GROWERS
(sgd.) Jaime Lozano, President
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_237.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
DISPATCH
10
Chief, WH
INFO.
FROM
125
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PROCESSI
ACTION
1582
MARVED FOR INDEXING
XX
ĐƠ INDEXING REQUIRED
GREY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
Can I INDEXING
ABSTRACT
KAUM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/Operational/AMSCROLL/AMRÁIN
Tapes of AMRAIN Press Conference Held 5 April 1966
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED: FYI
Under separate cover we are forwarding the tapes of the Press
Conference held by AMRAIN on 5 April 1966 under the auspices of
AMSCROLL.
§
Attachments: USC(aal)
3 tapes
>
Distribution:
3- WH/C, w/atts. usc
690!
Explates trob automatic
ad
cafioficz
L
ļ
i
-
CROSS REFERENCE TO
Reg
for Philip G. ELMARD
19-120-26
DATE TYPED
CS CUPY
DATE DISPATCHED
12 April 66
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
APR18 205
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-24955
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-132-49/3
17

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_240.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDEX:
dives 0 No
CLASSIFY TO FILE no. Lizi
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID□ RET. to branch ◎
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
i
JMWAVE
:
ACTION
WH/C8
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
28
21
R
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
.OTAL CO
36
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
☑ RID COPY
☐ .
☐ SEEYYED ☐
TIME
FILE, UR, WES ADDP, CHOPS, Ci/K2, RIJAN, CA2 CH/PROP
Do4, Do/H.3
SECRET 161807Z
DIR OTTA CITE WAVE 9651
TYPIC AMSCROLL MHVIPER
REF
A FI
INDEXED AND CONTROL COPE 160 176430
WAVE 9650 CIN 76425
IDEN:
SECRET
-MATCHED NR.
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
CFN 9651 9650 MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONACA
BT
#mií (dę Pan 1994
A
is
1
}
t
}
t
7
I
19-120-16
16 march 196e

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_238.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDLE
□ YER ☐ No
VES
CLASSIFY TO Fibem
N-BEF TO FILE NO.
10
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY
FROM
Juin Polvin
JM WAVE
ACTION
E, MIFIED MESSA"
2.8
2!
MYUNIT
6
SECRET
NOTIFIE
TOTAL COPIES
MOU
00000034
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
WH/C 8
☑ RID COPY
☐ ISSUES ☐ SLE. ☐ TUNED
TIME
FILE, UP, WE.8, ADOP, CHOPS, BHAN, DOY, PO/H3 CI/IC2, CAZ
CA/PROP
SECRET 1618082
UF
DIR OTTA CITE WAVE 9658
TYPIC AMSCROLL MHVIPER
MAH 1,500
COPIES
MICROFILMED
P
IG 66 76425
ANY
FI
DOC. MICRO, BER.
1. ON 15 MARCH WAVE ASSET AMSCROLL (IDEN) RECEIVED TELEPHOFTMAL
CALL FROM PERSON IDENTIFYING HIMSELF AS JOHN WIES, AN OFFICIAL
OF DELHI EXPORT AND SERVICE, LTD., DELHI, ONTARIO. SAID THAT
DELHI HAD TRADED FOR TWO AND ONE HALF YEARS WITH CUBA UNT IL
DECEMBER 64 WHEN TRADING SUSPENDED AS UNABLE COLLECT AMOUNTS
DUE. WIES SAID HE THEN WENT CUBA IN ATTEMPT COLLECT. INSTEAD
JAILED UNT IL FEB 65. AMONG CHARGES WAS HE KUBARK AGENT.. UPON
RETURN CANADA HE UNSUCCESSFULLY SOUGHT TO INTEREST CANADIAN
GOVT HIS CASE. T HEREAFTER RETAINED LAWYER AND NOW PREPARING
SUIT. SAID HIS LAWYER ALSO REPRESENTS OTHER CANADIAN FIRMS
WITH OUT STANDING CLAIMS AGAINST CUBA AND HIS SUIT BEING PREPARED
PO UN
IN CONJUNCTION OT HERS. OBJECT IS TO IMPOUND CUBAN ASSETS TO OBTAIN
SATISFACTION CLAIMS.
2. WIES SAID HE HAD BEEN CONSIDERING APPROACHING KUBARK
OR OTHER OD YOKE AGENCY OFFICE IN CANADA TO FILE THIS CASE BUT
DID NOT KNOW WHERE TO TURN. HE DECIDED INSTEAD TO CALL
AMSCROLL AS HIS FIRM IS RECIPIENT ITS ECONOMIC BULLETIN.
SECRET
14
14.120-2-
6 73

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
DISPATCH ☐
Chief of Station, JUWAVE
SECA E T
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division
Request for Reference Attachments
ACTION PEQUIRED DEFERENCES
REFERENCE : UFGA 27811, 15 Juno 1967
XX
NG INGIN QU
SALE QUALIFIED DES
M
Please forward Headquarters a copy of the
attachment which went under separate cover to addresseo
only, on Reference dispatch.
Distribution:
3 - COS, JMWAVE
Otis C. VIGKANT
4
CROSS REFERENCE TO
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
DATE
(n. 1
automatio
26 JUN
and
26 JUN 1937
UFGS-9645
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
HOS FILE #BER
19-120-26/3
ORIGINATING
21 June 1967
Distribution:
1
-
1
->
. WH/Reg/C
WH/COG/MO
Ⓑ- WH/COG/CA/EW
OFFICE
OFFICEN
C/WH/COG/CA/EW/William Sturbitts: jll
OFFICE SYMBOL
WH/COG/MO 21
COORDINATING
CATE
s
OFFICEPS HAME
LIT
4163
FORM 53 USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
14
MPO
OFFICE SYMBOL
AC/WH/COG
DATE
'40'
13/6
RELEASING
OFFICER'S SIGNATURE
evite
DISPATCH

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_241.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
DISPATCH
TO
Chief, WH
-
INFO.
1
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PROCESSING
ACTION
POSED
ACCOM
PLISHED
XX
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESA
CAN ILDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE LPV
SUBJECT
TYPIC/Soviet Agricultural Problems
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
MICROFILM
Please provide Radio Free Europe study.
The Station has read the attached article from The Wall Street
Journal with considerable interest. If readily available we will
appreciate a copy of the RFE report on this subject which is mentioned
in this article. Material of this nature is most useful in the
AMSCROLL effort (via radio and written analysis) to support its thesis
that if after forty-two years the Soviets have not solved their
industrial and agricultural problems how can the Cubans hope to do so
in less?
I
f
Attachment:
article
h/w
{
Manc
for Philip G. ELMARD
1
CS CUPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
19
CATE TYPED
14 Feb 66
0. 26
DATE DISPATCHED
FEB 15 1966
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-24517:
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
♦19-132-49/3
Distribution:
3- WH/C, w/att.
jatt.
the di
Excluded fra
CROSS REFERENCE TO
GOT
17.
323
#
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_239.jpeg ---
14+00000
$
PAGE 2 WAVE 9650
+4
DECRET
IN 76425
ADDED THAT AS ANTI-CASTRO.ORG AMSCROLL WOULD KNOW WHAT TO
DO WITH INFO HINAGAPER IENCES. OFFERED GIVE FACTS TO
AMSCROLL IF REP WOULD COME HIS OFFICE OR HE WOULD COME
AMSCROLL OFFICE IF EXPENSES PAID. AMSCROLL CHIEF NON-
COMMITTAL AND SAID WOULD DISCUSS MATTER WITH COLLEAGUES
AND TELEPHONE WIES..
3. DELHI FIRM IS ON AMSCROLL MAILING LIST FOR ITS
BULLETIN. SUGGEST WIES CLAIMS WORTH EXPLORING FURTHER.
REQUEST TRACES AND ADDEES REACTIONS BY 18 MARCH IF POSSIBLE
DUE FACT WIES EXPECTING CALL FROM AMSCROLL.
4. WAVE TRACES INDICATE WIES CANADIAN WHO MADE TRIPS
HAVANA IN FEB, MARCH, APRIL, MAY AND APPARENTLY NOV 63
(AMLIST-1 AND AMCOVE REPORTS). IN FEB 64 SIGNED CONTRACT.
TO PROVIDE TWENTY FIVE, MILLIONS DOLLARS WORTH OF CHEMICALS
(IN50337)
TO CLBA. OTTA 2207 OF 24 DEC 64 REPORTED WIES ATTEMPTING
OBTAIN LETTER FROM GOVT OFFICIALS EXONERATING HIM FROM
BLACKMAIL CHARGES.
5. INDEX WIES.
SECRET
CFN 9652 15 MARCH AMSCROLL JOHN WIES DELHI EXPORT AND SERVICE
7/2
LID DELHI ONTARIO CUBA DECEMBER 64 FEB 65 CANADA NOT KNOW AMSCROLL
18 MARCH NOV 63 AMLIST-1 AMCOVE FEB 64 2207 24 DEC 64
BT
CEPDEY
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_242.jpeg ---
14-00000
22
THE WALL STREET JO.
Monday, February 7, 1966
AL
**
*
(264 24517
I
Commodities
Soviet Grain Imports Expected to Continue \
Despite Big Plans to Boost Farm Output
By RAY VAKE
Staff Reporter of THE WALL STREET Journal
A drastic revision of the Soviet Union's
agriculture in getting under way aimed at lift-
Ing farm production by improving the lot of
the peasant. For 1966, Russian leaders are de-
liberately plowing industrial growth to the
amallest increase in the postwar period, while
they count on a sharp upsurge in agriculture
to propel their economy forward.
Markets at a Glance
NCV. DIC.
145
Spot.
Between 1966 and 1970, the Russians plan
to pour an average of $13.3 billion a year in
investments into agriculture, up from $11 bil- 140
lion in 1964 and slightly more last year.
They're encouraging free marketing of fruits
and vegetables from small private plots held
by peasants. Farm pay is being increased. In
summer or fall, the first Farmers' Congress
since 1925 will be held to plan fresh ways of
stimulating production.
Evidence Indleates the Soviets have a tough
job on their hands. The likelidood is that the
Communiat. world will continue as a major
importer of grains over the next few years.
JAN.
$18.
Dow Jones
Commend
1936-20-100
145
140
Futures
135
135
130
130
COMMODITY INDEXES
Dow Jones Futures, Friday-133.11, up 0.70;
last year, 136.53.
Dow Jones Spot - 143.91, up 0.36; last year,
143.12.
Reuters United Kingdom-474.1, off 1.5; last
year: 449.5. (1531 equals 100.)
The scope of the Russian agricultural over-
haul is being analyzed in Munich by Soviet
specialists of Radio Free Europe and Radio
Liberty, which beam anti-Communist programs
into Soviet bloc countries, and by authorities in
foreign ministries in Western Europe and by
American Government officials.
May Have Important Side Effects
The success or failure of the Soviet cam. meal, soybean oil, cottonseed oil, potatoes,
paign may have an important bearing on cattle, coffee, copper, lead, zine, silver, wool.
world grain trade, American farm programs, cotton, hides, Chicago rye and New York
the cold war and Boviet political attitudes to-
ward the U.S.
Agriculture in the Achilles' heel of the Com-
munist world. The Soviet government reported
last week that grain output dropped 21% last
year to 120.5 million metric tons from 152.1
million in 1264. The result is a exitinuing need
for big grain imports. In the crop year ending
June 20, more than 35% of the world's com-
mercial movement of wheat-abo_19 million
(metric tons-is expected to go into Communist
lands. A metric ton is 2,200 pounds.
Higher
-
rubber.
FUTURES PRICES
Wheat, oats, soybeans, soybean
Irregular-World sugar, corn and frosca
pork bellies.
Lower-Cocoa, domestic sugar, eggs, plat-
inum, flaxseed, Winnipeg rye, London and
Singapore rubber,
average $32 a month for the collective farmer,
as against $91 a month for the industrial work-
er. So peasants try by every means to leave
the collective farni, he says.
In this situation, some analysts of the Com-
The U.S. has only a small portion of that munist world warn against being misled by
trade. Canada, Australia. Argentina and grandiose plans of the Soviets. They note that
France are major Communist be suppliers. former Premier Nikita Khrushchev launched
But those bloc sales deplete their export equally impressive farth programs, raising
stocks, reducing competition elsewhere for the farm investments from $6.6 billion in 1959 to
U.S. Wheat stocks of major exporters may be $11 billion in 1964. Yet gross farm output
under 30 million tons at the end of the current | rose only 10%.
crup year, just over half the 1959-63 average. V. Zhulin, a senior agronomist on a stale
So the anticipated continuation of Communist farm in the Altal territory of Southern Siber
grain purchases could lift world export prices. put his finger on a key problem in one recept
It also may result in an increase of production report. He said, "We must consider just how
goals in U.S. farm programs.
and what is necessary to make the peasant
How does the Soviet farm-upàft campaign feel responsible for the harvest daily, hourly
fit into the future world trade picture for and for the whole year. No agronomic or se
grain? Only Romanis will have surpluses. The cial control can compensate for this lack of
Soviet Union, Hungary, Czechosīvakia, East responsibility." So far the Russians ara akuė
Germany, Poland, and possibly Bulgaria, willing this problem. Party bureaucrats aren't
need imports, predicts Carl R. Everb, Radio yet willing to surrender their power over the
Free Europe's top agricultural economist. A land to decision-making peasants.
U.S. Department of Agriculture official says:
"It should come as no great surprise if the
Communist countries remained in the grain
market, perhaps up and down, but in, for some
years to come.'
Outlook for 1966 Cloudy
Even as the new drive starts, the outlook
for the 1566 crop is cloudy. Not kng ago.
I Khoroshilov, a member of the cubeum of

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_244.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
TO
8
INFO.
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
1.1
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PROCESSING
PRO
FOBER
✗X
ACTION
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
ACCOM
\D{ ISHET) {
SUBJECT TYPIC/AMSCROLL
C Summary of Radio Broadcasts for the Period 19 October to 20 January
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED: FYI
1.
1966, Inclusive
Beginning with the broadcast for 19 Octobor 1965 the Station
at its request began receiving a summary of each AMSCROLL AMTHIGH
program. We forward by separate cover these summaries through the
evening of 20 January 1966 (with the exception of the periods of
28-30 November and 2-4 January for which no summary was prepared).
Henceforth those summaries will be forwarded on an at least bi-weekly.
basis.
2. The Station is attempting to improve both the punch and the
quality of these programs. We believe, for example, that more
emphasis should be placed upon regime failures and upon the needless
economic mess. Further, we are trying to refine the "irritability"
factor so far as Castro and the regime are concerned due to the
sensitivity of Castro to this type of attack. Calling Castro (on
19 January) the "Soviets' barking hound dog" is a sally in this
direction.
3. As usual with programs of this nature the size and reaction of
the audience is most difficult to ascertain. It is some comfort to be
able to record that during this period 10 letters have been received
by AMSCROLL that have been inspired by this program. The President's
uncle, Carlos Dorticos, told AMSCROLL-3 that he had been a frequent
listener to this program and that he had listened to this program at
his home the night before he left Cuba.
.
(att'd)
Attachment: USC att
Broadcast summaries
Distribution:
3- C/WH, w/att., usc
2- WH/C, w/o/att.
-
19-120-26
Philip G. ELMARD
CS COPY
DATE TYPED
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DATE DISPATCHED
27 Jan 66IAN 31 1966
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-24421
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-132-49/3
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_243.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
i
2
1 træ Frivist Ministry of Agriculture, warned that
winter wheat seedings throughout the country
were endangered as a result of the dry fail.
Raya one Radio Free Europe report: "Thus
it seems conservative to submit that only if.
optimum weather conditions prevail throughout
tra føviet Union could the ambitious 1966 farm
an be achieved, which is highly unlikely."
At the Institute for the Study of Soviet Rus
STINTOS
rat
val ring revinutionary teennological In-
‚on, there is no poraibility of the Sovieta
1taining their main targets" Targets call for
14 mea în total farm output of nearly 10% this p
Yet Party becretary Leonid 1.
Brezhnev himself admitted that grosa farm
vrstgrät increased by only 10% in the last six
year.
Each a degree of stagnation la even greater
than many Western observers had projected.
says one Radio Free Europe report.
Anotheme of Stagnation
Stagnation is evident. Peasants on 37,000
erkjective and 10,000 state farms lack incen-
tives, a.nce they receive only the residue of
sroom after state collections. Weather is grim.
Inatribnation is mutdated. Decisions are made
by distant bureaucrats,
the wide plains of the Ukraine, rutted
Wazim tracks connert isolated collectives,
where the horse still is common. In Siberia,
farm, plots carved from scrub overgreens lie
ULLAT Anow most of the year. În Kaza khatan,
where land stretches to far horizona like the
sage brush country of the American West,
brak winda blow topaoll from “virgin landa”
agredtural plota.
Statistics for 1980 show the Soviets har-
vested only 11.4 bushels of wheat an acre com.
pared with the U.B. average of 26 bushela an
acre. Yielda haven't changed much since, and
simliar yield gaps exist for corn, sugar beeta,
nata, karley and other products. Farming still
empirys a third of Russian familles. Crop land
(trdais about 600 million acres, sonia 50% more
ithan in the U.S., yet Russia must import
grain.
The is promoting considerable soul search-
\ing in the LKAR. Blasts from hinterland of.
ficials are surprisingly candid.
In Volgograd, one official complains: "On
the farms in the region there exista an acute
størtage of field tractors and grain combines.
For every 2,500 acres of cropland we have
two crawler-type tractors, and for every 2,500
acres grain crops, only, three combines."
From Bashkiria, a productive farm repub
He in the Urals, comes another complaint: Of
620 enective farms in the republic, only 150
are fiy electrified. Of the inhabited centers
in the republic, which has a population of
more than 3 million, 60% don't use electricity
at all.
'
Vadly F. Garbuzov, Soviet minister of fl-
nanze, recently reported in a confidențial docu-
ment: Agricultural capital in the Sovļet
Union averages $2.200 a man, whereas in the
U.§. it averages $11,000 a man, or five times
1 larger.
Flight From the land
▲ flight from the land currently is accen-
tuating problems. From all parts of the coun-
¡ try come reports of peasants abandoning farm
life for foe supposedly gay life of cities, even
though the cities may be only Novosibirsk or
Bacu
In the Pskov region, I. 8. Gustov, party
secretary, complains that in the last 'seven
years træ number of able-bodied farmers in
his area has been halved from 200,000.; Saya
he: “If the loss continues at the same rate,
in 10 years there will be no able-bodied farm-
ers left." He complains that in his area, wages
!
}
:
H
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_246.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
.1
"Intrigues about the Tri-Continental Conference". Ben Barka, the mastermind of the
Tri-Continental Conference schoduled for Havana, myrteriously disappeared in Paris.
We remember that, when it was thought that this conference would be held in Algoria
undor Chinese sponsorship, its masterminds, Che Guevara and Ben Hella, disappeared.
The character who took up Cho's role in this Conference, Ben Barka, now vanishes in
Paris. Could it be that what happened to Ben Bella is about to happen to Fidel?
November 3, 1965: "How Abject Can Castro ho!".
"How Abject Can Castro Ho!".- In his recent statement to three
American and one Spanish journalists, Castro appears arrorant and acts as though he
didn't care for an "aggiornamento' with the U... However, from the context of his
statements it is quite obvious that he would like nothing better than being re-admit-
ted to the Latin American community and getting the blessing of the U.S.
His attitude must have been a terrible disappointment to his followers, who must
necessarily see it as evidence that the U.S.S.R. is in full retreat in its economic
war with the U.f. over Cuba.
1
"Reticencee That Reveal Insincerity, Caution and Fear",- At last, the Old Guard has
spoken out through Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, following the devastating "purge" that it
underwent in the hands of Fidel Castro. But fear of a second, bloody phase of the
purge has kept Carlos Rafael Rodriguez from openly attacking Fidel Castro.. Instead,
he has taken resource to veiled reticence and references to Fidel Castro's "petty-
burgeois" past, mixed with insincere praises, in order to make it known that the
"classics" of Marxism-Leninism still distrust Fidel. If their differences with the
"new wave" are really a thing of the past, why does Old-Guard man Carlos Rafael now
bring up the fact that Fidel was not one of them at the beginning, and that he was
not a true Marxist-Leninist?.
!
November 4, 1965: "The Reaction to Camarioca: Castro's Resentment and Bitterness".
Castro's vow to let dissatisfied Cubans out was his own error of appreciation. Pres-
ident Johnson took the challenge and then Castro tried to sound out the U.C. for co-
existentialist overtures. Hence his rejection of the Red Cross to mediate in the
matter. His bitter reaction forbidding the departure from Camarioca shows the extent
i
T
$
J
r
* MAT#AGA Br¨
☐
White
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_245.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
)
!1
-
***
"HAKLA.... UNIDAD FEVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
November 1, 1965: "There will be no changer in the Blockade of Rod Cuba".- A comment
on the rumors that U.S. policy on Cuba will "soften". It is indicated that Washing-
ton, for humanitarian rensone, accepted Castro's parley to evacuate the spiritually
wounded. We also comment on the statement of a Washington official who said that
"the foar that the U.S. may alter its rolations with Cuba is unfounded (and) there
is no prospect for a change in our relations". We arrive at the conclusion that U.S.
policy on the subject will no vary: Cac'ro will be economically strangled and there
is no future for Communism in this Continent.
"What About Political Priconers?".- Fidel Castro has takon a sorion of steps that
limit, by several means, the offer he made to allow dissatisfied Cubans to leave
the Island. Even though no public statements have been made about the political
prisoners, it may be expected that this matter has been considered in the negotia-
tions, and that Fidel Castro must be forced to play fairly in order that he may not
trade with the agony and the hope of 70,000 political prisoners and with the hope
and the anguish of their relatives.
November 2, 1965: "Burencracy and Red Tape can be done away with".- A comment on
the 20-year term given the "Responsable" of "Colective" 17, of Regional 2-33 of the
Cuban Concolidated Enterprise of Grocery Stores, one Roberto Montes de Oca Ramos,
and on the creation of the Ministry of Food Industries, as the typically Stalinist
system to imprison officials in times of famine, and to create more bureaucratic
agencies in an attempt to solve the problem. Cuba's administrative apparatus is a
complicated spider-web: the Ministry for the Sugar Industry, the Industrial Dept.
of the INRA, the Ministry of Domestic Trade, the Ministry of Foreign Trade, the
National Bank, the Ministry for Agricultural and Cattle Affairs, the Consolidated
Enterprise of Grocery Stores, the "Collectives", the Regionals, and now the Ministry
of Food Industry. Lots of bureaucrats. Tons of paper. Milos of Red tape. But,
still, no food!
1
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_248.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
:
!
x
paring the cotting for the "discovery" of Guevara's corpse: it will be said that
asthma killed him, or the imperialists, or the head-hunteres of South America.
"The Second Chaster of Marcos Rodriguez' Trial,- In his statements to American
journalists, Carlor Rafael Rodriguez has dug out the issue of the trial against an
informer, which trial was regarded as one against the "Old Guard". This trial has
something more to it: the "dossier" on Joaquin Orloqui, which Fidel keeps hidden in
his sleeve in order to produce it whenever it may suit his purposes. Perhaps Carlos
Rafael has dofinterred this issue to signify that internal rifts are more acute than
ever before.
with
November 8, 1965:
1965: "The Red Tyrant in Beyond Himself with Rage".- Comments on Castro's
TV appearance yesterday. Castro is furious over the Cubans' rush to get out of the
Island, and over the fact that technicians and doctors are about to desert him. He
roncta by pretending to dismiss the doctors: "the grapes are sour". We remember
Hatuey, the Indian chieftain who rejected conversion because he said that if his
Spanish tormentors were going to Heaven, then he didn't want to go to Heaven.
Similarly, if Heaven is Castro's Red paradise, the doctors and technicians want out
of it.
"What About the Tri-Continental Conference?".
The abduction and disappearance of
Ben Barka seems to have suspended preparations for the Tri-Continental Conference
that the Reds had scheduled for, January in Havana. Judging by the kidnapping of the
chief organizer, this Conference, which is rejected by China, is given the same treat-
ment that forced the suspension of the Algiers' Conference that the Chinese sponsored,
Lot's wait for the second chapter and we will see whether the Conférence is held after
all or not.
November 9, 1965: "What Goes From One Nov. 7th to the Other". We recall that on
Nov. 7, last year, Castro was interviewed by a correspondent for the New York Times.
At the same time, he said that he would down whatever American U-2 planes he could
with this surface-to-air antiaircraft missiles. He also said that he would use
Soviet troops in the defense of his Com-unist regime, and that he would welcome a

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_247.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
t
1
:
of his frustration.
All there developments allow us to predict that Castro is in
such bad shape that radical changes may soon be expected in Cuba.
#Vore on Carlor R, Rodriguez' Statemento".- In his statements, Carlos R. Rodrigues
has uncovered that Fidel Castro has created the objective conditions for fractional
work within the Party with the exclusion of the Old Guard and of the Students Diroc- '
torate from the executive bodies of the Party. This reveals a state of internal
rift and decomposition, and such revelation, coming from a cignificant Old Guard
source ruch as Rodriguez, foretells rather unpredictable consequences.
November 5, 19/5: "Sitting Bull (Carlos Rafael) Hap Spoken!" Emphasis on Carlos
Rafael Rodriguez' personal features, on his ambition to become the Cuban Revolution's
"Lenin", all of which dreams have been torn to piccos by Castro. Likewise, Carlos
Rafael, strengthened by Mo: cow's backing, has pointed out, though in a rather subtle
manner, the action of the unknown men of the Party in the struggle against Castroism.
This he did when he indirectly charged that Castro war a petty-burgeois.
"Castro Caught his Fingers on the Door and the Door Slammed on his Nose".- Because
his situation is more difficult every day, Castro hinted that his conversations on
the Cuban exodus meant the beginning of deeper negotiations with the U.S. This is
false. Cuban Communism is not negotiable. When President Johnson opened the doors
of the U.. to all Cubans, he left it well established that this was done because of
humanitarian reasons, and that Cubane would be welcomed here until they could "return
to their homeland and find it free from fear".
November 6, 1965: "Stop this lionsence,,, Where is Che Guevara?".- Where is Che Gue-
vara? This is a quest on that constantly hammers on Fidel's cars, whenever journal-
iste, diplomats, etc., ask it to him. Besieged by this question, Castro one day told
a correspondent for the Madrid daily "Pueblo": "I think that Guevara may never return
to Cuba. He may be somewhere in Argentina". Castro, like Stalin did before him,
begins by stating that Guevara will not return to Cuba. Such a question may only be
answered by the murderer when he speaks of his victim. On the other hand, he is pre-
1
k
*1947. & MO

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_249.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
military alliance with the U.F.S.R.. Now, a year later; his heart bleeding over his
parting with Red China, and under brutal Soviet pressure, Castro's Nov. 7 speech
inaugurating a hospital sounds like that of a "constructive" ruler whose concern is
for the welfare of the people, and who asks that same people "to march up the (socia-
list) path". He is no longer arrogant. He belatedly begs for the people's support.
"What About Latin American Communist Parties?".- Castro dismissed the fact that
China did not greet the reorganization and change of the Cuban Communist Party, but
spite and concern were obvious in the tone of his voice. Castro knows that he has
betrayed China. On the other hand, the Communist Parties of Latin America have not
addressed Castro any congratulatory messages either, which indicates that they are
beginnning to turn their backs on him on account of his "purging" of the old guard.
Under such conditions, Castro's subservience to Moscow is greater every day. Castro
has entered the most unsurmountable phase of his crisis.
× November 10, 1965: "The Reason and Nature of the Economic Blockade".-
From Castro's
Nov. 7th speech it may be deducted that the U.S.S.R. has only been able to supply him
with weapons, bullets and cannons. We state the reasons why the U.S.S.R. will not be
able to invest more in Cuba, and that, at the same time, the nations of this Hemisp-
here will continue their economic boycott of Castro's Cuba. There can be no economic
coexistence between Red Cuba and the rest of the Continent.
"Continental Resistance to Aggression".-
Even though the Lima meeting of military
chiefe from 17 American countries did not take up the question of the Inter-American
Army, the assembled chiefs unquestionably took a step towards its establishment, which
will be ultimately decided on by the Q.A.S. Aggression to the Dominican Republic,
and persistence in Cuba-drafted subversive plans against the rest of the Hemisphere,
urgently demand that adequate continental security plans be adopted in order to face
up to the threat and put an end to aggression.
Tar
:
:
1
:
$
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_251.jpeg ---
14-00001
1
turned them into roldiers, militiamen, informers, etc. There is no way to replace this
rural labor force. If these men were returned to the country, they would plot against
Castro. If they are not returned, they cannot work.
"The Fate of Communist Puppets".- The fate of Ben Pella in Algeria and of Sukarno in
Indonesia show what Communist puppets can expect. Both men were intimate friends of
Fidel Castro, both visited Cuba, and both servod the samo Red master whom Fidel Castro
serves. The outcome in their cases constitute a writing on the wall for the bearded
tyrant.
PERTH, AN
L
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_252.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
(
"HARLA..., UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
November 15, 1965: "Fidel Castro's Grave Sugar Problem".- Following Moscow's promises
and instructions, Cac'ro plunged deep into overproduction of sugar in the hope that he
would be able to sell the whole crop. Last year he turned out over 6,000,000 tons of
sugar and about half of it is still in the warehouses. The Russians never purchased it.
This year Castro is blowing his top in face of his dilemma: If he turns out 6.5 million
tone, the USSR will not buy it. If he cuts production down, the cane crop will be lost.
In face of such a dilemma, he esca: or to the Sierra Maertra with the doctors and, from
there, he puts the blame for all his woen on the U.S.
'
"Storm Airs Blowing on the Turquino".- The rally atop Mt. Turquino became a kind of a
requiem for the tyrant's aspirations. Hefnd hoped that the negotiatione aimed at evac-
uating discatisfied Cubans to the U.S. would pave the way for an 'aggiornamento' with
the Americans, but his maneuver has turned on him like a boomerang. So, besides him-
self with rage, he lashed at the U.S.
he lashed at the U.F. On top of all this, Cuban patriots showed that
they are still active, and that the Malecón Drive is vulnerable to succeerful commando
action.
KETAT KERETEK kaamuater SAM IPX 1978 V
L

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_250.jpeg ---
palar PNG EN VENTE KOLICA THA reset kostar *ðar - la*** ♥
14-00000
"HABLA... UNITAT REVOLUCIONARIAN (W.R.U.L.)
November 11, 1965: "Coexistence Dreams Come Tumbling Down".- Thesis: There can be no
coexistence between Castro and the U.S. After Castro returned from Moscow in 1963, and
under pressure from Krrushchev, he began his first conciliatory overtures with the United
States. Nikita had pleaded geographical and economic impossibility to maintain his com
mitments with the Castro tyranny. Result: The Soviet Union cannot continually support
Castro and the U.S., on their part, reject Castro-Communism. In face of this situation,
the men in the Cuban armed forces and in the government have only one dignified course
of action: to remove the despot from power in order that Cuba may emerge from chaos and
tragedy.
"The O.A.S. Should Not Postpone Its Meeting".- The same Castroite aggression that
earlier forced the postponement of the O.A.S. Conference now warrants that the Conference
no longer be postponed. The said aggression has created a situation that demands new
instruments and agencies to put the O.A.S. in shape to face up to the subversive threat
planned and executed in Cuba. The process that started at Punta del Este must be brought
to a successful end: the re-establishment of democracy in Cuba so that the Pearl of the
Antilles may rejoin the Inter-American system.
November 12, 1965: This program was entirely devoted to reading Dr. Sciglie's article
entitled "There Will Never Be Coexistence Or 'Making Up' between Castro-Communism and
the Free Peoples of the Hemisphere".
November 13, 1965; "Cuba's Internal Economic Front is Disastrous".- Castro, seeing that
he'll never accomplish "coexistence" with the U.S., and that the USSR is gradually with-
drawing its assistance to his regime, seeks refuge in the internal economic front, and
tries to increase the agricultural production of the peasants. The open failure of said
purposes became evident ever since Castro took 150,000 men from the countryside and
13

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_25.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
i
!
=
ALMAN par 4,4
Chief of Station, Santiago
Chief, WH
SECRET
XXX
Clu
Chief of Station, INWAVE
DYVOUR/AMSCHOLL
○ Study of Cuba/USSR Commercial Relationa
Reference: SANTIAGO 4466
Use
For use as determined by Santiago.
Wo forward under soparate cover for station Santiago
the AMSCHOLL study in Spanish of economic relations between
the USSR and Cuba as requested by the reference.
Roger E. MARCHBANK
Attachment:
Study in Spanish, U/B/C
Distribution:
- what
:
t
-
COS, Santiago, whatt, U/S/C - To OUT Pouch
C/wi, w/o att 24/7
W/COG, w/o att
1
1
Removed from Mroject
Suits file,
CS Classification: 19-120-26
JOB 468-644/43
Box: 19 Fold: 3
UYGA 27811
SECRET
CS COPY
JUN 15 1967
14 June 1967
10-120-26/30-2
26
75
141310/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_253.jpeg ---
14-00000
(
1
1
1
1266877
1
"HABIA,,, INHIPAD PEVCLUCIONARIA" (W.RU.L.).
November 16, 1965: "The Rio Macling of Forcism Ministers".- A comment on the
II Extraordinary Meeting of Inter-American Foreign Ministers, which will convene
tomorrow, Nov. 17, in the city of Riade Janeiro, Brasil. The main points in the
agenda: economic development, the Alliance for Frogress, the strenghtening of the
Inter-American system, the improvement of instruments for the peaceful solution
of controversies, and the strengthening of representative democracy. Lastly,
and even though this is not a concrete point in the agenda, special attention
will be devoted to the struggle against communism throughout the Americas. To
this respect, the VI Mooting of American Armies has just taken place in Lima,
Ferú, and in it concrete decisions, plans and formilas were adopted.
"Another 0.1.5, Step".- Tho subject of subversion is unavoidable to the Rio
meeting. The Funta del Este declaration, the diplomatic isolation and the July,
1964, trade blockade sanctioning the aggression arainst Venezuela, put the Com-
munist regime on the verge of collective military intervention. Subversion has
continued, and sustained Castro-Communist interference in the Dominican Republic
will force the 0.A.F. to take further steps in sanctioning the aggressor.
:
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_254.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
>
}
"HARLA
UHICAL REVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
1
'
November 17, 1965: "Har Drums on the Sino-Sovict Border".- On the basis of long-
timo difference between Red China and Russia, wo agree with Vice-President Humphrey
who, during a recent TV appearance, disclosed that foviot and Chinese border gar-
risons were being beefed up lately. The motto "more cannons and loss butter" is
becoming fashionable again, with the consequent decrease of production and increase
of military budget appropiations, ar woll as with a decrease of foreign aid to
countries such at Cuba. From thir, we may conclude that Castro's situation worsens
day by day. Cuba's only folution in to ret rid of Cantro in order that it may once
again enjoy peace and prosperity.
"Aspects of an Unsolved Rift".- The Communist Parties of the Americas are worried
over the situation of their old Cuban comrades who live under a Damocles' sword in
the hands of Fidel Castro. They have been unable to keep the trial of Marcos Rodrí-
guez from having a second part in Ordoqui's caso-file, which is also the second part
of the "trial" against Cuba's old Commies, Latin Communists are having a clash
with Fidel and with the Castroites of their respective countries, and they are en-
gaged in fractional work to undermine Castro's designs and put their old comrades
back in the leadership of the Cuban Party.
54437
1
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_255.jpeg ---
14-00000
amirador de
C
November 18, 1965:
#HARLA.,,, UNIDA”, EVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
"What Can Castro Get From The Russians?".- An analysis of Fi-
del's now stand, whereby he abandons neutrality between the USSR and Red China.
In return for his "pledge of allegiance", the Kremlin has offered Castro an increase
in economic and military aid. Perhaps the Russians will in fact give him guns,
tanks and rockets once again in exchange for Cuban sugar. But as far as economic
aid is concerned, Castro should know that Soviet-Bloc countries are firm about
halting further investments in the Cuban failure. What is more, they are talking
of demanding political, financial and economic reforms from the bearded despot that
would permit minute inspection and guidance of Cuban affairs by his sponsorɛ over-
seas. Will Castro tolerato such intervention? No one knows.
"The O.A.S. IN RIO". The O.A.F., which convened yesterday in Rio, faces a continent
-wide situation whose gravest problem is still Communist Cuban subversion and aggres-
sion. The process that bogan in Punta del Este and continued with the July 1%2,
meeting, must be brought to a successful and by taking more severe steps against
the focal point of subversion and aggression: Communist Cuba.
.1
:
1
I
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_256.jpeg ---
14-00000
04
..
"HABLA... USIDAN RUVĖLUGIOHARIA"
REVOLUCIONARIA" (V.R.U.L.)
November 19, 178: How the Anti-Communist Fight Goes".- A summary is made of the anti-
Communist struggle in Asia, which is rynthetized in the Indonesian events. There, anti-
Communism is gaining force day by dny. And in South Viet Nam, where the U.S. Army has
just gained a great victory, rotating the principle of defending the integrity of South
Việt Nam. In the ferican, we can quote from the brave speech delivered by Brazilian
Fresident Marshall Cartello Branco, who called for a revision of the old concepts of
political intervention and creating that of counter-intervention against Communism.
Lastly, we point out that the voice of arms rang out in Cubs with an attack against
the Cuban coast line, which evidenced the Cubans' fighting spirit against Communism.
"Back to Popular-Front Tactics".- It is anounced that the Kremlin is returning to its
policy of popular fronts, which was in vogue back in the 30s. Some of the results of
this policy were Italin'e 'entente' with Hitler and Mussolini to put an end to the
Spanish Republic. In France, after undermining its institutions and demoralising the
French People by means of the Popular Front, the Kremlin concocted the Nazi-Soviet
agreement that unleashed the Second World War. This time, the whole thing is aimed
at the Americas and the change is anounced in Havana. This is the new wrapping of
continent-wide version and the purpose is to create an atmosphere of confidence and,
eventually, to befray the (Communiste') democratic and Catholic allies, as well and
everyone else who is raive enough to join the Fopular Fronts.
1
November 20, 1945: "A Tribute to Cuban Heroes".- A political, moral, military and
revolutionary evaluation of the Cuban patriots' attack against the Eighth Police Pre-
cint, the Riviera hotel and the house of puppet President Forticos.
In the article,
it is indicated bow Castro, even though he spends hundreds of millions of dollars to
accomplish invulzerability, found out overnight that he is far from invulnerable to a
naval attack perpetrated by a group of Cubans who wiled nearly inefficient weapons.
Castro wrath over the failure of his spionage network knew no limits. We pay homage
to the hercas who, with their action on Cuba, saluted the other heroes: the ones that
1
}
1
• T
**
YGNARESS, 26, A VYSNIŁA NR XAN ALT
1
(+)

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_257.jpeg ---
14-00000
shed their blood in Viet Nam.
T
:
"Counter-Intervention is Equivalent to Legitimate Self-Defence".- The stultorn, un-
warranted interpretation of the doctrine of non-intervention has made it possible for
the Communiste to intervene themsolver in the affairs of other countries, even milit-
arily and on a large scale, ar did the Castro forces in the Dominican Republic. The
concept that hangs around the halls where 0.4.5. meetings are held is that which
allow: for counter-intervention as a means of legitimate self-defence. This is
equivalent to preventive action against subverrion originated in Communist Cuba.
November 22, 1965: "Castro Liod About Hin Spanish Trade".. On the 21, Radio Havana
told the Culan people how beneficial trading with Spain war being. The bunch of Cas-
troite lies must be exposed with facts and statistics in order to show that Spain'e
trade with Cufi, during the first oight months of 1965, han dwindled by 31% as compar-
ed with 19:4. On the other hand, Spain has withdrawn its ships from the Cuban run,
and does not seem very interested in Cuban orders for tuna fishing boats, since the
productive capacity of its shipyards is alrealy committed in advance till 1967. With
falce data, Castro tries to show that he has floated the blockade, but the truth is
that the blockade is flouting his own designs.
"Counter-Intervention: a Supplement to the Johnson Doctrine".- In Rio, Dean Ruɛk has
proposed that the O.A.S. adopt what measures may be necessary to prevent another Com-
munist regime from being octablished in this Hemisphere. This, essentially, war the
doctrine that Fresident Johnson stated when the agression startel against the Domini-
can Republic. Besides, among the Foreign Ministers, the concept of counter-interven-
tion is gaining momentum as a way counter-attacking the aggressive forces. This means
that the blockade and isolation imposed by the 0.4.5. against the Communist regime,
and the newly-issued Johnson Doctrine, are being supplemented in a manner that may
be definitive towards ending the subversive threat that emanates from the focal point
7.
* 1 *
2
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
DIOS
PATRIA
LIBERTAD
19 S E. 9 st. MIAMI
UNIDAD
Mayo de 1767 - No.37
Organo de
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
Especial porn of pueblo de
Cubo
LAS INTERIORIDADES DE CUFLET
Editorial
UNA VERDAD COMUNISTA.
Victor Volsky, Jefe de la Delegación Observadora
Soviético of XII periodo de sesiones de la Comisión Eco-
nómica de la O.N.U. para America Latina, declaró recion.
temente en Caracas que "Cubo Comunista es la hija mo.
nos de la Unión Sovretica, y a las hijos menores hasta se
les mima",
Palabras son éstos que tienen la virtud de enardecer
al más indiferente de los cubanos, yo que las mismas re-
flejan el aire de superioridad con que estos arrogantes
comunistos eslavos tratan a nuestra Patria. Sin embar.
go, no puede negarse que el insolente Volsky dijo una
verdad en Caracos, al menos en cuanto se refiere a la
primera parte de su aserto.
Ciertamente, los hijas menores dependen de sus po.
dres. Son ellos quienes les proporcionan todo lo necesa.
rio pora su subsistencia; son ellos quienes determinan,
con la inapelabilidad que supone la patria potestad, el
rumbo que han de tomar los pasos de su adorable retoño;
y son ellos quienes so beneficion del producto de sus
labores.
Siendo así, no cabe duda de que Cuba es la hija me..
nor de la Unión Soviética. La URSS y sus satélites, on
efecto, venden a Cuba el 78.6% do sus importaciones;
la URSS es quien determina la politica que ha de seguir
el régimen de La Habano, y es la URSS quien recibe, con-
juntamente con sus títeres de Europa Oriental, el 80% de
jos productos que exporta nuestro Patria. Ante los datos
de este brutal monopolio comercial, y ante la suprema au-
toridad que ejerce la metrópoli sobre su pseudo-colonia
del Caribe, ¿quién puede negar que Cuba es, a todos los
efectos prácticos, la hijo menor de la Unión Sovietica?
Hasta aquí la verdad. La mentira estriba en el aser.
to do que Cuba, es la hija "mimoda" de la URSS. Porque,
como todo el mundo sabe, lo que es en realidad es una
hija oprimida, explotada, maltratado, y prostituida por es-
"madre" desnaturalizado que es la Rusia Soviética.
Por I. Andres Collazo
EI
el
NOTA DE LA REDACCION:
outer de este trabajo, ocupó
cargo de representante en Londres
de la Empresa Cubana de Fletes
(CUFLET) hasta el pasado mes
de Marzo de 1967, en que decidió
abandonor al regimen comunista
de Cuba y solicitar asilo político
en el mundo libro.
Y
Mi mision on Londres era de
fletar noves del mundo libre para
el comercio maritimo con Cuba, a
fin de cubrir at deficit resultante
de la escosez de buques cubanos
del bloque comunista que pudie.
ran manipular el volumen comer.
cial. Mi tarea no era nada fácil.
……….El trafico maritimo del mundo
libre con Cuba ho disminuido en
un 41.6% entre 1963 y 1966. Las
razones de esta caída en el tráfico
maritimo del mundo libre con Cuba
son, a mi entender, los siguiries
la "Listo Negro" del Gobierno de
los Estados Unidos; las prohibi-
ciones decratadas por diversos Go-
biemos, talos como el de Gracia,
al del Libano, y otros, y la acción
del boicot emprendido por los tra-
bajadores portuarios del hemisfe-
a traves de la ORIT, a cuyo
fronte marchan los miembros de la
Federacion Portuaria de Venezuela.
..Tan pronto como se inició el
barcot, algunas firmas navieros
británicas que en aquel momento
estaban considerando la entrada
en el trafico maritimo con Cubo,
pero que tambien mantenían rutos
regulares con America Latina, can.
colaron
sus planes respecto a Cu.
bo. Otra razon es la de los infor-
mes referentes a la situación eco-
nomico y al matico maritimo de
Cuba que publican las Organiza-
ciones do exiliados cubanos. Yo
tuve, por ejemplo, lo oportunidad
de ver alguno de los boletines y
Continúa en la pág. 2
7

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_259.jpeg ---
14-00000
Radio SUMMARIES
Summaries
r
MAHLA.... UNTRAR REVOLUCIONTIN" (W.R.U.L.)
1
:
•
December 1, 1965: "The Soviets Order The Surar Harvert To Start".- While Raúl
sought military and economic aid in the USTR, Fidel Castro defiantly warned that the
sugar harvest would begin as late ar Jan. 7. But back came Raul from Morcow, not with
a pledge of subriantial aid, but with instructions to have the harvest begin immediate
ly. That is why Castro changed his strategy and launched the harvest right away.
"What Is The Tri-Continental Conference?".- In the first place, the Tri-Continental
Conference does not represent the countries of three continents, as its organizers
claim, but rather the Communists and terrorists from the ro-called "rovements of mation
al liberation" in those countries. In the second place, the Conference is a retting
for the Sino-Soviet struggle for the leadership of the African and Asian Communist
Parties, and the struggle goes on amist intrigue, maneuvers, abductions and murders.
December 2, 1965: "Cuba Cannot Return To The Latin American World".- Once more Dean
Rusk has clearly stated that, in order to be admitted back into the Inter-American
community, Cuba rust first severe its ties with the UFFR and quit subversion and in-
filtration in this Continent. Castro's friends inside the O.A.S
Castro's friends inside the O.A.S., who harboured hopes
of bringing Cuba back into the Organization, should abandon them. Those "holier-than-
thou" characters who pretend to defend self-determination and non-intervenvention in
public, privately charge Castro-Communism and its aggressions.
"A Double-Play Against Peking And Castro".- By means of the Tri-Continental Conference, :
which summarizes a phase of maneuvering and counter-mancuvering within the Sino-Soviet
rift, the Kremlin has managed to out-wit the Chinese, take control of African, Asian
and Latin American Communist Parties, and feel a death blow to Castro's dream of becom-
ing the role leader of the Latin American Commies.
7
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_260.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
(
-
- 2 -
:
1
¡
December 3, 1965: "France and Castr^ism".
Micforte nos never come alone, specially
for Castro. Now, in view of his horrible financial crisis, his relations with France
are obviously deteriorating. As evidence, we point out the French cuncollation of a
f. 75 million contract to build a quicklime, insecticide and fertilizer plant in Cuba.
"Castro Roises Mir Volume Amin".- Castro's failure in his attempt to ret the U.S. to
change policy of extreme agitation, and he is promising arms to the subversive forces
throughout the Americas. But there is one mora reason: the Tri-Continental Conference,
of which Castro wanted to be the center. However, he has been displaced to a secondary
role. That is why his approach to subversion is closer to that of the Chinese than to
that of the organizers of the Conference.
December 4, 1965: "Latin America Excludes Cuba From: Its Plans".- As has been said,
come characters in Latin America publicly oncourage Castro's Cuba, but privately despise
it and exclude it from their plans. An example is the Spanish plan to help in Latin
America's industrialization, and its exclusion of Cuba. The 19 Latin American nations
also banned Cuba from their U.. plans for industrialization.
"Castro Is Moved By. Dispair".- Rather than strength, Castro's speech of Dec. 2 denotes
weakness and dispair. His bragging about arsenals with which he counts to help sub-
versive froces throughout the Continent is a desperate provocation. There are three
key pointes which corner Fidel Castro: One is the doctrine that subversion is agres-
sion; the other one is the Johnson Doctrine, which became effective in the Dominican
Republic, followed by Dean Rusk's Rio de Janeiro statement that the U.S., whether alone
or accompanied, will intervene wherever aggression occurs.
December 6, 1965:
ly,
"Castro's Economic Woes Grow: Now It's Mexico and Russia".- Recent-
we talked of Cuba's difficulties in its relations with France. Now, we echo a report
"
that Cuba's trade with Mexico is steadily dwindlin-. On the other hand, Russia's huge
sales of gold to the world market in order to be able to pay for the wheat it has
{

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_258.jpeg ---
L
14-00000
of aggression: Communist Cuba.
November 23, 1965: "New Shadowr Over Cuba".- Dean Rusk'r statements in Rio have
ruperlative importance when he stater the American stand remrding the defense of the
Hemisphere from Communist aggression, whether with the concurrence of the other countrios
of the Continent, or unilaterally. On the other hand, we are informed of an epidemic
of foot-and-mouth disease in Ukrania and European Russia which is affecting most of
the fovicts' cattle production. All this indicates that the future holds no future
in Cuba, if we may play with words, and that responsible men in the Castro Gvt. and
armed forces have only one porrible course of action left: to remove Castro and return
Cuba to democracy and welbeing.
"The Great Maneuver of the Tri-Continental Conference".- The Kremlin leaders that
boast the Tri-Continental Conference ar a triumph over China, are using it at the
same time for a far more dangerous maneuver against the American Continent. Sub-
vertive plans have failed, and now they are plarning a tactical about-face to continue
their cubversive tasks through other means, i.e., the Latin American Popular Fronts.
Eut the memories of that political epoch back in the 30s. and of its European conse-
quences, are very much alive in the memory of the people for the new tactic to yield
any fruits in the Americas.
:
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_261.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
I
- 3 -
Lought, fringe the USSR's forcim exchange reserver down low, and this will mean
further trouble for Cartro.
"The Working Masses Against The Communist Regime".- With the dock workers of the U.S.,
Canada and Puerto Rico joining up, the labor hoycott action is completed. Ships flying
the flage of countries that trado with Castro will have a tough time at Amrican ports,
and the noore around Castro's neck in tightening.
-
December 7, 1965: "Death of Antonio Theeo".. This article wis devoted to the plorifi-
cation and remembrance of Gen. Antonio Macco, the Supreme Commander of the Cuban Army
of Liberation in the 1895 War of Independence, who was rhot and killed in action on
Dec. 7, 1896, near Punta Brava, Pinar del Río. The Communists have attempted to crane
the memory of this hero because Maceo wan a halfbred, of humble origin, and, novortho-
lore, Cuba's No. 1 roldior. Hence, to curtain, their theories on class struggle, the
Communists had to destroy the memory of the working-clase hero of a burgeois nation.
"The Tri-Continental Challenge".- Aside from the meaning of the Tri-Continental Conf-
erence within the Sino-Soviet rift, the raid meeting in a challenge to Inter-American
law and security which comes from gangsters and Communist agents from three continents.
Cuba, a ratellite and the focal point of subversion and agerersion to American countries,
will be the setting.
December 8, 1965: "American Victory, Soviet Defeat".- We comment on America's great
feat with the Gemini 7, while Fursia's space thrust has suffered a severe ret-back
with its Lura-8.
"Castro Charged With Che Guevara's Murder".- Felipe Alvahuante, in the Mexican daily
"El Universal", charges that Castro murdered Che Guevara on Soviet orders. Of course,
the cheap novel concated by Cartro on Guevara can convince no one, and, in 9 months,
no evidence has been produced that point to its truthfulnere.
therefore, is more acceptable than Fidel Castro's version.
Alvahuante's charge,
f.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_262.jpeg ---
14-00000
->
December 9, 1965: "Sinklangs Rurians and Chinere on the Warpath".-
Chinere-Soviet
skirmishor near Sinking, while dirmirod ar torritorial differences, really respond
to the ideological rift. The USSR incroused its military budret by 5 at the expense
of education, foreign aid and arricultural and in³u: trial development, on the grounds
that "American aggressiveness" force her to do ro, but the truth is that it is the
Chinese throat that promptes such a move. On the other han', we can expect larger
shipments of Soviet arms to Cuba, but a cut in economic aid.
"The Gemini 7".- The Gomini 7 flight and its scheduled mooting with the Gomini 6
will bronk all space flight recoris. The foviot total of flying hours in tripled,
and a rimilar advantage is reached over Soviet launchings. This is the exponent of
the degree of development achieved by the Wort towards goals which the Communiat world
is not oven approaching. Berides, it is a warning to Foviet lenders who reek to destroy
tho accomplishments of the Wost. If they were to attempt ruch destruction, they would
be destroyed instond.
-
!
December 10, 1965: "A New Collapro of the Commio World", The Marxist maxim that
history is "irrevorrible" his collapsed once again, this time, in the Congo, Algeria,
Indonesia and, more recently, in the Sudan. The African peoples are being reborn to
political life, rapidly waking up from the Communict spell and taking an anti-Com-
munist stand. The last country to do so is the fulan, which has jurt outlawed the
Sudanese Communist Party and warned all other parties having connections with the Reds
that they may suffer the same fate.
"What's in and Behind the Arenda of the Tri-Continental Perley".- In the Tri-Continent
al Conference, the USSR will show off its triumph over the Chinese with respect to
"liberation movements" in Africa. Taking advantare of Castro and Che Guevara, the
Soviets managed to penetrate and divide several Parties in Latin America.
several phases in the Kremlin's counter-nneuver: the 'coup' araint Ben Bella, the
suspension of the Algiers Conference, the vanishing of Che Guevara, the total subnis-
There are
¦

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_266.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
"CIDINT 7 AND 6".- New records and foals have been accomplished by the .. with the
rendez-vour of the Gemini 7 am 6 pace capruler, specially or rocards accuracy.
We
are inclined to think that there is no limit to reientific development in the conquset
of space.
The clean cut clarity of American reports on the space flight, contracte
with the obɛcure and comber recret surrounding Coviet experiment.r.
--000--
T
}
S

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_263.jpeg ---
14-00000
L
->
.5.
-
tion of Ca: tro and the change in Indoneria. Castro and the have been defeated by the
Kremlin.
December 11, 1965: "We Forecast The Failure of the Forthcoming Sumar Harvest".- We
go back to the subject of the Culan "zafra" on the basis of Castro's June 8th state-
ments, when he plodged the reconstruction of the Cuban purar industry, the erection of
a modern new sugar mill in the Cauto River valley, an! a 6.5 million ton suger harvest.
What has been accomplished? The Cuban curar industry is still in shambler, there is no
new mill in the Cauto valley, and Castro, with protects and lies, is already attempt-
ing to justify that there will be no 6.5 million tone of tumar.
"The Bankruptcy of Cuba's Foreign Credit and the hogeolt".- Coinciding with the news
insued by French fertilizer company was concelling its Cuter contract due to Cuba's
failure to pay for over $3 million's worth of merchandise, it was reported that the
boycott would be extended. The dockworkers of Canada, the U.S. and Puerto Rico have
joined the Latin American workers' hoycott of veerele flying the flags of countries
that trade with Rod Cuba.
December 13, 1965: "A Explosive Power Struggle in Fucsia".- We analyze how the power
struggle between Korygin and Brezhnev in known through the stands taken by the Russian
papers "Izvestia" and "Pravda", respectively the organe of the government and of the
Communist Party. The Prime Minister's s'and consists of pointing at the economic
debacle and at the need to maintain the current level of military expenditurer, while
Brezhnov's position is one of advocating a strong-armed Ped Army by incroceing the
military budget. The Army, in turn, has rewarded Brezhnev's support by causing the
retirement of Mikoyan, so that 2nd Party Secretary Hikolai Podmorny could be kicked
upstairs to the Presidency of the USSR. More changes are to come within the framework,
of this rift.
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_267.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR.-WRUL Radio Scripts SUMMARIES.
DEMOLIGIONISTA" (M.R.H.L.)
December 17, 1965:
1
1) 11 Cubane rail to exile; were conscript: 4 draft-aged.
2) U.\. to homb more industrial centers in North Viet Nam.
"Why Ir, Apel Killed Himself".- The tory of ir. Apel's ruicide on account of the
Soviet-East German Trade Agreement.
"The Ruz. in Hin Ear".- Carlor Pafael's now trip to Morcow, which has no official
Justification whatever, following a new article published in London, has put bug in
Fidel'a car. Through articles and statements made al road, Carlos Rafael Rodriquez
ecoms to have been charged with the lack of turning Comunist Fartior against Fivel
and for the 'Old Guard'.
December 12, 1965:
MEUS.-
1) Keliamarn Outlines Effects of U.". Paid on North Vict. Num Pover Plant.
2) Ecuadorian Youth Congres: Conforms Communiom.
"Why Lr. Acel Killed Himself".- Continuation of shove editorial.
rimilar difficulties confronted by Bungury, Czechorlovakia and Cuba.
This part deals with
"Frecautions on the Eve of the "Tri-Continental' Parley".- The Cuban repime has order-
ed a number of preventive arrests in crier to head off the possibility of assarrination
attempts or kidnappings among the foreign delegator to the Tri-Continental parley.
There stops are taken mortly amint the pro-Chinese military. Castro, for his part
fear: that something may happen to hir, ar "comething" haptened to Ben Bella two days
before the Algiers Conference, which then had to ho called-off.
December 26, 1945:
$1
HENS
1) 28 New Refugcer Sneak Out Of Cute Aboard Small Verrel.
2) Spain To Send Medical Corps A Token Of Support to Viet Nam War.
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_264.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
-h-
"Subverrion in Uruguay and Monstruous terror in Venezuela".- The blueprint for viol-
once in Uruguay is part of the poncral plan for Latin American subversion drafted in
Cuba. The stops taken by the Uruguayan Government have chocked the early dangers of
Chitro-Communist rubversion, but it is significant that the Communicte should have
moved their target more to the south in order to provoke a Dominican-style civil strife.
The abominable charecter taken by Vonozuolan Red terror in also meaningful: a young
housewife murdered by a bomb placed inside a Christme present consistent of an imge
of the Virgin Mary.
December 14, 1965: "President Johnson: The Will of Freedom".- A comment on the state-
ments made by President Johnson, who has roam: erted U.S. determination to defend the
freedom of South Viet Nam rogardless of all possible consequencer. We stress the macri-
fice, in terms of wealth from the earth and human lives to which Red China forces North
Viet Man, while the Chines themsolver laugh at peace offorts. This case is presented
as an example to all other peoples, and what in bound to ha pen to Fidel Castro is
also pointed out.
"They Talk Pence But Practice War".- Poace in a favorite subject of Communist propa-
ganda. It is also one of the most deceitful ones, since, while the Commies talk of
peace, they systematically reject all bona fide proposals to accomplish peace, such as
in the case of Viet Nam. The Tri-Continental Conference schedulled for Jan. 3 bears
the gorm of violent conflict to create new Viet Nams in America and Africa.
--060--

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_265.jpeg ---
14-00000
-7
:
Radio Scripts SUMMARIES
MOUNTHALIA" (\.P.U.L)
December 15, 1965:
$ 15, 1995:
"VPY THE CUBAN LEAVES STIR NELOVED CONTRY".
We rebuff an editor-
fal published by the lavana newspaper indo" whereby the communists editorialicts
attack those Culan whore leave for exile. We point at the real courer of the Cuban
ezodur, which we confirmed with the words of MAJ. Sergio del Valle, a prominent Castro
officer, who in Ciudad Libertad, on Dec. 13 spoke of the tarch life of the peacante.
ECRIST TRAINING SCHOOLS AND ITS POULTON.– It has been announced in Cuba that the
mmber of graduaten from the terroriste training schools of Winer el Frio will be in-
crossed to 8,000. This is the school where the Castroiter trained Latin-American future
querrille and terrorists in crier to use them later in their respective countries. In
Venezuela, one of Cantro's favorite tarrots, a mountruous dead har just been perpetrated-
by the Communists, in the murder of Mn. Parrel, who received a bomb mailed by some of
the graduatos from there Cuban schoole.
December 16, 1965:
1) U.S. hombers doctroy huge power-plant in North Viet Nam.
2) Castro step-up rarihuana harvects for export.
t
7
"THE COLUNISTS HAVE LOST THE CUBAN YOUTH".- In this article, we annalyze how Cuban
youth, because of its natural thirst for knowledge, as first became interested in the
scientific principles of Corrunism, thinking of the porribility of finding the answer
to man'a quert for happinecr there. However, young Culans are now disillusioned with the
theory and practice of Marxist-Leninism, and they are obvisualy discasociating themselves
from Castro-Communism. That is precisely why, a few days ago, the regime thought it
convenient to call a national meeting of the Communist Youth. In this Red event, those
leaders that failed in their task to indoctrinate the young were purged, and it was
agreed that brain-washing would be a prerromative of the political police of the State.
Castro has lost the young. The young are fighting Castro. They must be helped.
1
1
:
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_268.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-
.2
:
DITORIALS:
Communist Part Fall In Cuba" We echo reports by recent refugee arrivals concerning
Onstro's purchase of defective farming equipment. There purchases indicate why Castro-
Communism is failing in Cuba thanks to the attitude of crooked merchants that still
trade with Fidel, to the regime's own stupidity and to the resistance of the Cuban
people.
The Rods Want No Feace".- North Viet Nam has rejected all peace offers and made
nockery of every approach attempted to put an end to the war. Moscow as well as
Feiping keep their puppet from signing app trace and force him to maintain a war for
which they give him no aid. Communism would have reveral more Viet Nams in other
continents, in order to extend the conflict at the expense of the peoples.
December 21, 1965:
NEWS.-
1) Four More Cubans Slip Away To Freedom: Three Draft-Aged Youths And The Father
of Ono.
2) Juanita Castro And Pr. Carlor Porticos, Polative of Cuban President, Talk
About Cuban Fituation In Miami.
EDITORIALS:
Not Even Castro's And Dorticos! Relativer Want To Stay In Cuba".- Castro's efforts
to prevent the Cuban exodus are in vain. Not even the clore relatives of the Cuban
President and Premier want to stay on the Red Irland. Carlos Dorticos, an uncle to
Pres. Osvaldo, has echoed the failure of the regime's backtone: economic planning. We
stress his words that Cuban. foreign-exchange reserves are low because curar production
uses more dollars than it will yield.
"The Unsalved Conflict And The Tri-Continental Parley". The still unsolved crisis of
the Dominican Republic has bounced back in so crave a manner as to have caused 40 dead
in Santiago, and Castroite violence continues because the forces of subversion want to
have a banner for agitation in the Tri-Continental Conference. The masterminds of sub-
version in Cuba provoke these acts of violence in the Dominican for this purpose.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_269.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
1
3
-
December 22, 1265:
NEMS:
1) Rusria Suffers is International Stu'entr' Union Farley Kurt Be Moved From Sudan
to Czechorlovakia.
2) U.S. Troops Authorized To Purcue The Enemy In Cambodian Territory.
EDITORIALS:
"The Strupele Within The Communist Regime".- A continuation of the preceding article
on Dr. Carlo: Dorticos' statements concerning internal rifts among the Cullen Co-munists.
According to Fr. Corticos, the "Old Guard" in persecuted and the Army in rowingly dis-
ratified.
"How The Soviet Grin On Crib Grows Tighter All The Time" With the arrival in Cuba of
227 Fovict technicians to be assigned directly to the sumar mills, Russia rets direct
con'rol of Cuia's sugar production. The same thing hap ens with the minerals and the
exploitation of the mines, whose products go directly to Russia since the mines came
under the control of Soviet technicians. Politically, Russia has chosen Havana as the
setting for its anti-Chinese "Tri-Continental Conference" in order to show off its
triumph over Mao from the Cuban capital.
December 23, 1955:
NEWS:
1) Venezuelan Police Capture Gang of Reds Who Raised Funds Through Blackmail.
2) Skipper of Cuban Freighter "Camilo Cienfuegos" Makes Statement After Defecting;
Ship Was Japan-Bound With A Cargo of Sugar.
EDITORIALS:
Miew Steps By The U.S. Aminst North Viet Nam".– A comment on the activities of the
U.C. in North Viet Nam, and on China's perfidy and Haoni's inability to draw its own
course, which has forced the U.S. to take one further step in the war by destroying
North Viet Nam economic complex.
i
L
Spatares
:
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_272.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
5
-6-
Viet Nam struggle in its proper place: one rade nocerrary by Communist apporrion that
has the rame characteristicir as it har elrowhore, in Aria and the Americar and wherever
Red rubverrion taker place.
L
--000--

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_270.jpeg ---
14-00000
C
-
-4.
-
}
:
"Fidel's Star Rapidly Declining".- Contro's about to enter hir coventh year in power
under bad omens.
Dictators Machado and Katista fell precisely on their revonth your,
and Castro's situation shows that his (tar is rapidly declining and that he's heading
straight for the abyss.
:
Documber 24, 1965:
:
MICHS:
1) Wave Of Refections Continues In Castro's Merchant Flcot: Skipper and Chief
Engineer of the Freighter "Uvero" Pefect in Ceylon.
2) Britain, U.f. Approve 1400 million Tale of Anti-Aircraft Artillery To Saudi
Arabia to Deterr Red Acgression.
Editorials:
1
"Russia 'Intervener' The Cuban Sumur Industry".- Unfor the guins of "technical arcist-
anco", the USSRR will send 227 "curar technicians" to the one country whose own technic-
ician: know all there is to know about rurar. The real purpose in clear; the Soviets
want to take complete and final control of the Cubur industry, an a now limitation :
to Castro's power.
"There Will Be No Merry Christrus For Cubona".- With its crimes and with the desperato
situation to which it har taken the people, Communism has made it impossible for the
Cubans to enjoy any happ iners this Christmas. But amidst an environment of sadness,
there will be faith and hope there ways. Communism has been unable to kill either of
there blessings, and there lies one of the weaknesses of Communist materialism.
December 25, 1965:
NEWS:
1) Venezuela loves To Prevent Entry of Follars To Fay For Jubversion.
2) Inter-American Bank President Felipe Herrera :roposer Development Plan for
Latin America; Cubs is Excluded.
Editorials:
"The Effects of the Maritime slockade of Cula".- 1 comment on the maritime blockade
against Red Cuba, which is now reinforced by the dockworkers of Canada, the U.S. and
•

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_271.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
C
:
Puerto Rico. e a result of the choking effect of the blockade, Foland, Caechorlovakia
and Eart Germany had to meet in Rostock in order to discurs means of helving Red Cuba
survive said offectr.
Ku suka sa
i
1
Algeria, Indonesia and Cyba".- China's main strongholds in Aria and Africa were Sukar-
no's Indoneria and Bon Bella'd Algeria. The Afro-Asian conferencer were an important
ar
point of Chino-Soviet clachef. Two days before the Algiers Conference was inaugurated,
Ben Bolla was ousted. Then, as a result of another 'coup', Sukarno staged an about face.
China thus lont her two main points of support. in the two Continental Now Russia is
masterminding the "Tri-Continontal" and we wonder what Red China will do about it.
December 27, 1965:
NEWS:
1) The U.f. Ihr Hot Considered Uring Nuclear Weapons Against North Viet Nam, Says
Ambacrador Goldberg at the UN.
2) Sovict Artists Demand Freedom of Thought and Expression Through Art Critic
Alexei Fidorov.
Editorials:
Wave of Defection: Greets Tri-Continental Conference"..
The Cuban Communists have
rent hundreds of thousands of self-addressed telegrams in which they congratulate them-
selves for the Tri-Continental Conference of Red punks that will convene in evana.
Yet, the Cuban people have not been told of a more democratic and manly greeting: the
wave of defections by officore of the Cubar merchant fleet, such as Cerar Loredo Garcia,
from the SF "Camilo Cienfuegon"; Conzalo Gonzalez Duque de Estrada and Francisco López
Surroa, from the SS "Uvero"; and, lastly, today, four officers, among them the skip er
of the SS "Aracelio Iglesiar", in Oraka, Japan.
"Cardinal Spellman In Viet Nam".- The Christmas visit to Viet Nam by Cardinal Spellman
gives American catholicism a militant rence in defence of democracy and of the spiritual
values of the Western World. Cardinal Spellm's words before the combatants put the
;
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_273.jpeg ---
14-00000
779
7
(
(I.N.W.L.)
"
5.
r
December 28, 1965:
MENS:
1) U.S. Grante Folitical Asylum to Four Defecting Officers From The Cuban Freighter
"Aracelio I-lorian".
2) Defecting Skipper and Three Officers Explain Their recition.
EDITORIALS:
1
"Porcow Griever Over Indonesian Failure".- A comment on Pravia's recent oditorial
threatening Indonesia over its proscription of the Communist Party. Thoto Pravda
thronts show how Moscow violates the principler of self-determination and non-intarvon-
tion.
Of courre, Morcow'n'dismy is undorg'ancable, as it has lost the platform it
ured for agirersion in F.E. Asia.
"Gangsters From Threo Continents".- Gangsters and agents for International Communiɛm
who extend violence and terror throughout thrce continents are borinning to arrive
in Havana. Culn, the fool point of rubver:ion for Latin Amerion, will provide the
rotting for that meeting. The Sino-Sevict rift in being ventilated an part of this
meeting, and Fidol Castro will be the loring party. The Chinese won't forget that
Castro betrayed them.
December 29, 195:
NEWS:
0
1) Havana Rods Shaky Over Tricontinental Parley, Take Steps To Prevent Phyrical
Attacks. Between Delerations.
2) "Cuban Foreign Trade Kept windling In 165", Says U.S. Dept. of Commerce.
EDITORIALS:
"Czechoslovakian Communicmi This article in based on newspaper reports on a document
releases by the Czech Communist Party, whereby the misery and elenster wrought over
the Czech nation by Communist are admitted. Communist leaders would like to take re-
source to the "Capitalist" world in order to emerge from such a dead-end alley.
1+1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_274.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
2
->>>
Communist agitation.
"Viet Nam, Congo and the Pominican Republic".- There are the topier of world-wide
In all three countrier, the plane of the Communists met failure,
and China and Rucria may le reen licking the woun's of their failures. In the Congo,
2,000 liver were caved from Communist ravagery. In Viet Mar, plans for aggression and.
dominance of fouth Eastern Asia have been held in check. An in the Dominican Republic,
Inter-American forces guarantee the security of the Hemisphers.
December 30, 1965:
NEWS:
1) "Price of Sugar To Stay Down In 166", Caye Brokerage Firm B.H. Dyer.
2) Red China to Boycott Tricontinental Farley; Violent Clasher Expected During
Conference.
Editorials:
"Cuban Seamen Who Walked Out Of E "Aracelio Iglesiar" Speak In Miami".- We run the
highlights of the statement made by Cpt. Francisco Cohne and corrent thereon.
"The Year That Envir".- During the yoar that ends, all the woer of the Communist regime
have been increased. Russia har tightened the screws of exploitation of its Caribbean
colony. And Fidel Castro has stressed his terrorist methods and concentrated on his
personal despotic power by "purging" the Party.
December 31, 1965:
NEWS:
1) Cuba Refured Credit By Non-Communist Countries.
ce`m
2) Cuban Refugee Peasant Charges That Reds Forced Him Out Of The Country To Seize
His Little Form.
Editorials:
"Cuban Women Forced to Hard Labor In Farms".- Reports reaching U.R. indicate that the
Cuban tyranny in secretely scheming to create women's auxiliary corps similar to U.S.
"VACE", but with a compulsory character and for the purpose of forcing Cuban women to
perform hard labor in State farms. We call on Cuban decency to do something to prevent
1.
[
"
In R,

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_275.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
"
37
M
-3-
thir outrare from taking place.
"Quertions To The Tricontinental Conference".- The Chinore delocation could he asked
the whereabouts of Ben Borka. The Russians might be questioned as to Che Guevara's.
They could all be arked about the Algerian "coup" and why it took place two days be-
fore the date ret for the opening of the Algiers Conference. They could be asked what
they think of the Indonesian about-face, and about fukarno's fate, and about Chinese
support, since the Bandung Conference, in Feiping's Afro-Asian Policy.
January 1, 1966:
EDITORIALS:
Down-11111
"Cynthecis of The Down-Hill Cource of Communism in Cuba".- A chummary of the most
important development that took place during the past year and that marked it as an
awful one for the Commics.
"The Year That Bogine".- The year that bering holds little hope that anything good
will happens to Fidel Castro and his thugs. Caught in the web of the Sino-Soviet rift,
he will be the great lover in the Came. On the other hand, the internal situation, dis-
content in the armed forces and the total collapre of his economy, depict a horizon that
is as comber to Fidel Castro as it in promising to the Cuban people,
1
t
!
+
i
!
=
;
i
11
3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_277.jpeg ---
hutzi
14-00000
j
2
:
ations with Cuba, Red China has shown up at the Tricontinental Parley for a three-fold
purpose: a) to frustrate all attempts at unity around the USSR; b) to charge the USER
with "treason" to Marxism-Leninism; and, c) to initiate the Chinese's revenge against
Fidel Castro. On this basis, we forecast a tough offensive against Fidel by pro-Chinese
Communists in the Americas. First, they will seek to destroy the image that they had co
built up of Castro, or what's left of it.
"The Venesuelan Ovt. on the Alert".- Through the Minister of the Interior, the Vene-
zuelan gvt. has issued a timely and accurate statement on the significance of the Tri-
continental Conference in terms of serious threats to continental security. The Vene-
zuelan gvt. points out that it is time to take resource to force to counter aggression
and subversion. It is indeed time to reactivate the 5th Resolution of the O.A.S. mo-
eting of 1964, whereby intervention is authorized in self-defense against aggression
and to guarantee the security of the Hemisphere.
JÁNUARY 7, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) RED CHINA BLASTS SOVIETS AT TRICONTINENTAL PAFLEY.
2) REFUGEE TOTS CELEBRATE ADORATION OF MAGI IN MIAMI.
EDITORIALS:
"China's Stand: A Threatening War-Monger".- Recent press reports tell us of movements
of Chinese troops near the Soviet border, and of probable skirmishes between the Red
Armies of Moscow and Peiping. This new sort of 'cold war' with occasional ringing of
firearms forces the USSR to increase its military expenditures, to slow down its agric-
ultural and industrial production, and to cut its foreign aid. Cuba will be one of the
big losers.
"The Tricontinental and the Sino-Soviet Dispute".- All efforts to prevent the Sino-
Soviet rift from coming out to the surface at the Tricontinental Conference have been
to no avail: the Chinese delegate blasted the Soviets mercilessly. These, on the
'st.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_276.jpeg ---
14-00000
RADIO SCRIPTS SUMMARIES
U.R.-WRUL.
t
"HARLA,... UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA"
(W.R.U.L.)
JANUARY 5, 19661
=
NEWSCAST:
1
1) VENEZUELAN MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR ACKS STRONG MEASURES AGAINST COMMUNIST
CON
SUBVERSION.
2) COMMUNIST CHINA ALVISES CITIZENS TO GO TO BED ON EMPTY STOMACH.
EDITORIALE:
"Somter Signs Over the Tri-Continental".- The secret character of the Tricontinental
Conference constitutes evidence of the rift and troubles within the parley structure.
On the other hand, Castro's and Dorticos' speeches calling for unity and quoting the
t
example of North Viet Nam as to need for such unity, are further proof of the above
assertion. We forecast the failure of the Tricontinental parley as a means to unify
Communiem in its projections for international struggle. We further forecast that the
Sino-Soviet rift will become all the more violent.
"The Workers of the Americas and the Tricontinental",- The workers of this Continent
have announced that the boycott against Red Cuba will be intensified as a reply to plans
for Hemispheric subversion being drafted at the Tricontinental parley in Havana. The
sensibility of the workers of the Americas is hurt by the fact that the Red terrorists
of the Congo, the murderers of women and children from three continents, meet in the
heart of the Americas to plot more bloodshed and destruction. The workers of the Amer-
iças are against Communist totalitarianiem, as is the people of Cuba, by whose side
they stand,
JANUARY 6, 1966$
NEWSCAST:
i
$
}
:
1) NEWLY ARRIVED EXILES TALK OF EXPANDING SLUMS IN CUBAN CITIES.
2) UNDISTURBED U.2. STEP UP PEACE OFFENSIVE,
EDITORIALE:
•
"What's Behind the Sino-Cuban Crisis".- Upon practically severing its economic rol-
1
L
7

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_27.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
Las Interioridades
+
:
*
.
•
"
Continuacion!
de UNIDAD REVO-
CARIA ESPECIALMENTE
CONCERNENTES AL TRA-
MARITIMO
: ;
:
"
. "
t
70%
"".
15% but
37
0
=
-
11
-
con el Sr. Aquiles rios funcionarios de ese gebieme.
FRANGISTAS. Este caballero, com. En noviembre de 1966 una delega-
juntamente con Stematis Manessis y ción de CUFLET que habia visitan
Elitimios Athanasiou, opera la linea do Moscu viajo a Atenas a tratar de
gegn FRANCO SHIPPING CO. negociar con FRANGISTAS. Lo de.
Sus oficinos principales se encuen. legación se
compania de Fernando
Atenes.
A fin de evadir las Hernandez, Gerente General de
responsabilidades. FRANGISTAS CUFLET y Salvador Formaguero, de
anipula sus negotios a traves de lo Oficina de CUFLET en La Hobo.
FRANCO SHIPPING COMPANY
no.
Y
Estando en Atenas esta delega.
* SubOS que son A. cion, FRANGISTAS le dijo que no
COD FRANGISTAS & S. MANESSIS, A. habia podido poner sus nuevos bu
APANGISTAS
PARTNERS. ques a la disposicion de CUFLET
STANLE
NAVIERA. porque estate teniendo prob.emos
A COMPANIA NAVIERA SA. ' con el gobierno provisional, pero
COMPANIA DE NAVEGACION
que el esperaba que en un futuro
SKIATHOSSA.. PURVIS SHIPPING
inmediato algunos de sus amigos
Co. (mo
meso que adminis. volverion o ocupor puestos claves v
tra los asuntos de FRANGISTAS on
las cosas podian volver a su estado
Londres).
anterior,
UNIDAD RE
0 Col.
5 [
$ 7
::
10
.
E
"
'
0
+ 4 3
•
-
27
L
"
sec
^
- contrates
Lo excercion a que
ATHEL LINE.
10 0301
scle s
20s que coquiere lo
UNITED MOLASSES.
"
G
..
'
A
.
0 -
-
sigue siendo un he
2
Cu.
men cifrente de listo
--
;
>
COMPANIA
ANTISTA to estado hacien.
do
"egocios con los comunistas des.
de hace tiempo,
A fin de corres.
ponder a sus servicios, la URSS co.
menza en 1965 a construit und floto
versos toques de bon de ciento cinco millones de dollares
pore FRANGISTAS La foto se com.
de distintos tipos.
penia de diecisiete buques de cargo
cinco embarca.
pesqueros
empresas frigorifices. FRANGISTAS esperaba
tres buques
Utilizar sus corqueros para desplo.
zor o TSAVLIRIS, VLASSOPULOS Y
LIVANOS del comercio maritimo
-
1*2*
50- 35
mon
bergo estos cours Lo navo
; 15.
A:
"
40*1
for
: "
Int
= 1
'
Com
pudiero deci
asi son lo que pudieras
50° ✔ pitatos modernos
137
, tales como TSAV-
cuales soliciton la m
dianer uno tem.
5 ▾
107
punto de
se encurn.
Firmado.
TSAVLIPIS
Ciones
con Cuba.
--
Y
--Yo era quien monipulaba los ne-
gocios con FRANGIST AS a moves
de la oficiño de CUFLET en Lon.
dres, debido o que a FRANGISTAS,
EN CIERTO MODO, le neredó el
gotverno cubano e la Union Sovie.
• ca.
Antes de 1955, la mayor parte
ce 10%
viajes a Cubo realizados por
as moves
tition
de FRANGISTAS se hi.
90,0 contratos de fletamento
com el zobiemo, soviético y no con
CULOS (LIVANOS CLUFET. Pero FRANGISTAS que.
r
f
t
no amplior sus negocios com Cuba
its PURVIS SHIPPING. de modo que viajo directamente a La
ER PUNCI MAN.
.
.
✔
Le Inglaterr
D GROSS Mahana a fin de mejorar su situa
cion respecto de los demas piratos
que y poder electuar sus trotos directo-
Con to oficina principal de
100
at no suponer CUFLET.
Fergies
po CUFLET.
1820
M
73.
...FRANCISTAS prometió que pon.
dra las baues de cargo que reci-
se binip de ln URSS o lo disposición
or de del comercio maritimo de Cuba, Y.
23: Loreal cod
porc
CUFLET.
comenzar Hero el EFTYCHIA
F
**
de l'etament
de pele de
• CUFLET
C
** we prevalece so-
madores.
... FRANGISTAS se jactoba que no
tenario problemas con el gobierno
griego vo que tenia amigos en altos
puestos. Llego inclusive of punto
de decir que tenia sobornados a vo-
... Por lo isto, FRANGISTAS es-
taba equivocado. En estos momen.
tos, los armadores y capitanes de
los siguientes buques de FRANGIS-
TAS están sometidos a un proceso
judicial en Grecia IRENE. BAR-
BARINO, ALICE, PANTANASSA.
SOFIA, TINA EFTYCHIA, ANDRO.
MACHI, KIRA MARIKLIA Y NIKO-
LAS F.
.. Otro de los pirotos que se apro-
vechan lucrativamente del comercio
maritimo cubono of cobrar por los
fletes un sobreprecia de un 20% a
un 30% sobre la tarifa usual del
Mercado
es Giorgio TSAVLIRIS.
ASI ESTAN LAS COSAS
-¿Y ese quién es? ¿Algún
gusano'
--¡No, hombre' ¡Es un comu-
mista latinoamericano pro-so-
viético!
Las Interioredades Japón. Los viajes de retomo
nes
(Continuacion)
Antes de penetrar en les operacio.
de TSAVLIRIS, quisiera men.
cionar que el mismo se encuentro
actualmente
desgracia
CUFLET. y él lo sabe.
en
con
°
.... Por supuesto, el gobierno cuba.
se
harian bajo fletamento por tiempo:
En otras palabras, a la ida, los but
ques estaban fetados por viajes, y
a la vuelta, estaban bajo fletamento
mensual,
Cuando el NEWGLADE
llegó al Japón con el primer carga-
mento de azúcar los japoneses pro-
pues el azúcar estaba
Su
primero encontrar buques que fietar,
problema que resulta difícil de re-
solver como Uds habran podido apres
clar, pues hav que recurrir a los or.
madores piratas, quienes a
se aprovechan de la situation,
……….El segundo problema es conse.
guir los divisos para pagar los fle
tes. El gobierno cubano confronin
una crisis tremenda en relacion com
las divisos, pues desde 1965 us
tuación del mercado mundial atuca
rero en baja le ha limitada a un e
1.e.
.... En 1963, TSAVLIRIS operaba dos testaron,
o tres barcos solamente. Gracias manchado de oxido y ademas conte-
los sobreprecios que le cobran al go. nia particulas de metal debido a
bierno cubano, pudo levantar una pesimo estado de las bodegas del
flota de 18 buques, numero, empero,
buque. CUFLET le presento los
que ha disminuido debido a los rotu. quejas a TSAVLIRIS pero este alego nimo lo entrado de divisos por co
ras y naufragios. TSAVLIRIS utili. inmediatamente que los cubanos ha- cepto de las exportaciones dr zu
zaba los contratos de fletamento bian inspeccionado y aprobado los
car. Sin embargo el gobiernu cubana
con CUFLET pero solicitor finen. buques antes de cerror el contrato, tiene que buscar la moneda corver.
Cramientos de bancos britanicos y Despues de numeroso corresponden ble para pagar puntualmente › los
adquirir ası su flota de barcos de la cia intercambiado entre ambos por armadores piratas.
segunda Guerra Mundial,
tes, CUFLET accedio a cancelar....CUFLET tiene orrendados o
el contrato del NEWGLADE y utili- todos por tiempo en estos momentos
no considera que TSAVLIRIS es un zat solo el NEWHEATH para los
5 buques britanicos, 3 griegos y una
oportuniste, y la oficina principal viajes al Japon. Esto parecia ser
chipriota, por
los
de CUFLET en La Habana se ha el final del asunto, pero no fue asi. $394.563.00 mensuales. CUFLET
que pago unos
convertido en objeto de chistes de. Los cubanos recapocitaron y se die.
bido a los numerosos enredos en ron cuento que con la pérdida del
que se han visto envueltos dicho NEWGLADE los entregas demora.
armador
el régimen durante
y
doble así es
tian practicamente el
Sus
cuatro años de relaciones.
que se dirigieron a TSAVLIRIS soli.
....Yo recuerdo un caso ocurrido du. Citando concelar el contrato de to.
rante el verano de 1964. TSAYLIRIS dos modos. Lo reaccion de
negoció un contrato en La Habana TSAVLIRIS es de imaginor, pero tu.
en virtud del cual sus buques de- vo que acceder a la solicitud de
transportar 120.000 tonelados CUFLET, aunque puso como condi.
de fertilizantes durante un periodo con que en el futuro todo contrato
de doce meses que se vencía en die tendría que ser confirmado de inme-
ciembre de 1965. Poco después, el diato por escrito.
Gobierno cubano no pudo cerrar la ----Si detengo la narración aquí, pue-
negociacion de los fertilizantes y de parecer que a TSAVLIRIS le to-
entonces trataron de cancelar el co perder y que los cubanos se so-
contrato con TSAVLIRIS. Esta lieron con las suyas, sin embargo,
componio se nego y viajo o Lo Ho. estos dos casas que he relatado le
bana donde el contrato se volvió a costaron el puesto a Manuel Novoa,
negociar y su terminación se prorro- quien era a la sazón el Gerente
go para diciembre de 1966. Ademas, de CUFLET.
bian
pos.
CAYMAN
tiene arrendados ademas dos Sugues
yugo eslavos y parte de los pogos
son en divisos (en lo lista anterio
aparecen los buques fletados -
por viajes),
no
A
---M³ consejo para las armadores
que oun se encuentran envueltos FM
trafico maritimo con Cubo comunisin
es que se retirer de dicho comercio.
pero oun porn aquellos que so nie.
guen a seguir este consnio, Creo
ner algunas sabios palabras.
...Mi sugerencia es que hagin la que
hizo la CIE D'ARMEMENT MARITI-
ME S.A. En abril de 1986 esta com.
poñía le fleto .po. seis
CUFLET EL BUQUE
SENANQUE, poro
mieles cubanas a Japan
el SENANQUE *^ hizo a la mar.
CUFLET notifico al armador francés
que en cuanto el buque llegar al
Japon y fuera descargado, CUFLET
rescindiria el contrato de fletimento.
que
TANQUE
trosp. to
En ronto
se le permitió al gobiemo cubano ----Abundando en el tema paso a ci.
transportar cargo general ademas de tar otro ejemplo. En 1965, CUFLET
los fertilizantes.
Pero ni aun así fletó el buque MAGISTER (pobellon
pudo el gobiemo cubano conseguir britanico) operado por
la cargo para los buques y lo que ISLANDS LTD de (Jamaica) con al La CIE D'ARMEMENT MARITIME
hizo fue dar largas a base de
objeto de que transportara frutas y S.A. protesto de inmediato y in comun
poner la seleccion de los buques de vegetales al Canada. Despues de nicó a CUFLET que si no depositato
esa compañia que iba a utilizar, fletar el buque, los cubanos no pu.
Finalmente, TSAVLIRIS se vio pre- dieron obtener suficientes frutas y
cisado a efectuar una nueva nego- vegetales y cancelaron el contrato
ciación y en esta ocasión el ven- de fletamento.
cimiento del contrato se pospuso pa- .……..De acuerdo con mi experiencia,
ra junto de 1967.
el gobierno cubano confronta dos
- Otro problema
problema con TSAVLIRIS graves problemas en lo referente al
surgió mas o menos al mismo tiempo mercado de fetes-mercado al cual
que los hechos anteriores con moti- trene
que recurre para cubrir el
vo del fletamento de otros dos de déficit en el transporte maritimo do
Sus buques. CUFLET fletó bida a la escasez de buques cuba.
'
un
en un plaze dado la suma de 100,000
francos en un banco france's sa le dn.
rian
ordenes al SENANDUR
que SQ dir
puerto europeo de donde se config.
caria el cargomento de mielas y cor
el producto de la vento de las mis
mas, la Compañia se cobraría la es.
tipulado en el centrato de flatamento
por seis moses.
En esta ocas on le toco perder a
el NEWHEATH y el NEWGLADE nos del mundo comunista. Los CUFLET. Los ormadores tienen la
para transportar azúcar cubano al dos problemas son los siguientes: palabra.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_278.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
:
- 3 -
other hand, availed themselves of their Cuban purpet to present to the delegates a
view of the breach of Cuban Chinese trade relations.
The Chinese were made to appear
as the "villain" who wants to starve the Cuban people of their rice rations.
JANUARY 8, 1966:
NEWSCASTS
1) CHE'S FATHER REPORTED CLAIMING SON'S BODY.
2) RED GUERRILLA CHIEFF CAPTURED IN PERU.
EDITORIALS:
"We'll Tell the Reds What They Want To Know".- Cubans seeking to leave the country
are subject to veritable #third degrees" by the C-2. They are acked whether or not
they sympathize with the gvt., why they want to leave, wheter or not they approve of
State control of all education, etc. The unfortunate applicants manage to give ans-
wers that will not jeopardize their chances of leaving. Yet, their interrogators are
apparently satisfied with the outcome of the questioning. The reason for this is that
Castro feels the need to give some explanation to the Communist world for the growing
exodus of Cubans. However, if the Communists are really interested in knowing why the
Cubans want to go, we will be glad to oblige... They are just running away from hunger,
terror, oppression, and from the execution wall.
i
"A Strange Soviet Mission in Viet Nam".- After the British proposal for peace in Viet
Nam was welcomed with seeming interest by Kremlin leaders, these have sent a strange
mission to Viet Nam whose purpose is not known. Maybe they have gone to vouch for
peace, or maybe, on the contrary, they have gone to Hanoi to pledge further Soviet aid
to the puppet Ho Chi Minh. At any rate, the terms of the conflict remain unchanged.
Ruck has stated that everything may be subject to negotiations except withdrawal of
American forces from S. Viet Nam, And the Communist powers, on the other hand, far
from accepting the peace overtures, step up their campaign of aggression, totalitarian-
ism, etc.
1'
Le
1
t
°

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_279.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
-
JANUARY 10, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) RED CUBAN EMBASSY IN MEXICAN CAPITAL BOMBED.
2) THREE MORE CUMAN SEAMEN DEFECT IN SPAIN.
EDITORIALS:
"Sino-Soviet Differences Over N. Viet Nam".- Sino-Soviet differences over North Viet
Nam have become evident lately. Nowadays, Russia is just as much interested in China's
loss of prestige in Viet Nam as China is interested in Russia's loss of prestige in
Cuba. Hence the "rice" economic aggression. We wonder whether the Soviet mission to
Viet Nam, rather than pledge unlimited aid to Ho, may have gone there to tighten the
screws of their Vietnamese puppet. This is indicated by recent Yugoslavian statements
- which is tantamount to speaking of Russian statements-- charging China with keeping
North Viet Nam from considering peace offers.
"The Tricontinental Conference: Action and Reaction".- The action: to coordinate plans
for subversion, aggression and terror in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The reactions
particularly in Latin America, and as recommended by the Venezuelan Minister of the
Interior: the use of force against Cormunist aggressors; the use of force against the
focal point of aggression in Communist Cuba.
JANUARY 11, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) CHINA SCOLDS FIDEL OVER RICE ISSUE, CALLS HIM "LIAR".
2) PERUVIAN GVT. RAPS SOVIET AGGRESSION FOLLOWING RUSSIAN STATEMENT AT TRI-
CONTINENTAL PARLEY.
EDITORIALS:
"Castro Goes Beserk, Helps Aggression Against South Viet Nam".- We comment on Castro's
shameless intervention in the internal affairs of South Viet Nam by lending his trans-
part vessels to transport war supplies for the Viet Gong. By doing this, he is trying
.
:
i
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_28.jpeg ---
14-00000
ESCUCHA TODOS LOS
PROGRAMAS DE U.R. Y
REPORTALOS. AL P.O.
BOX 3940, MIAMI, FLA.
"HABLA UNIDAD RE-
VOLUCIONARIA”, por
Radio Américas,
1160
kcs., onda larga, do lu.
nes a domingo a las 9:30
P.M.
Pepita Riera en "CONOZ-
CA A LOS CHIVATOS",
por Radio Américas, 1160
kcs., onda larga, las mar.
tes y jueves a las 11:00
P.M.
quieran
Cubana:
û nadie te langsira
que
cru.
pice
Mari havi
no il cas de
you
takes
la propaganda
Cutia the
que tiene didesa di que
rusos in
y
as cuenta que le refi-
apayou
the todos los dias en las
quece
perindiens, eu il radio y
eu la television.
tidel está mucho pear
di la que si al imagina
no tiene diviesos, no tiene
créditas, love companie
del mundo Libri e naw
retirando di comercia can
Cuba comunita lasbe.
ros de todo el temuge
no apayan il locaten
contra de los paises qui
hue requer comerciando con Videl y las
expremier al fuccaluta
que track is dibe
para cobarse &
ye
noticias
de la
a
Como
la
-
ase, pues, cuchario: Permanece alerta distribu
que para in the centra de trabaja, da
propaganda, via informes
nombres de chivatus, etc.
faxed
en miles de cuba ya loy
no las cage, ni las comités se enteran
fus in Siesta es que milicans, sal-
adas rebeldes y funciona el régime
experare il momenta di la liberación pu
to aseguramos lligara
"
1
:
1
L

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_281.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
->
- 6 -
•
"Sorcerer's Apprentice Ain't Nothin' But a Hound Dog".- From his dream role as the
Lenin of the Americas rising high over the Andes, Castro has fallen down a long way.
Today, he is nothing but the Soviet's barking, yelping hound dog in the Sino-Soviet
rift. His opium dreams, which were once encouraged by a Peking-oriented Ché, led him
to act as a sorcerer's apprentice in the Sino-Soviet dispute. The result: the Chinese
regard him as a traitor and to the Soviets he ain't nothin' but a hound dog.
:
1
i
1
And t
tes
THE

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_283.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2
{
1
"Turmoil in the Armed Forces".- Castro is worried over the obvious discontent that
is rampant in the Armed Forces, where a document that criticizes the regime and calls
for open rebellion has been secretly but widely circulated. Fidel Castro is doubling
his precautions and shifting officers and units, but he is doing so somewhat blindly,
as he does not know exactly where the focal point of discontent may be, nor what ef-
fects it may eventually have.
January 15, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) 50,000 NEW MEN TO BE ADMITTED BY ARMY.
2) VIII LATIN COUNCIL OF WORKMEN BLASTS TRICONTINENTAL CONFERENCE.
EDITORIALS:
1
"Cuban Reds Moan Over Bitter Rice".- Pressed by the USSP, Castro denounced the Chin-
ese Jan. 2 over the rice issue. The megalomaniac Castro went beyond all limite vhên
he said that he would give up rice from the Cuban diet. Put the Soviet advisors were
frightened, and they forced the Cuban press to back out and apologize to China. In
brieft the rice issue has been another Cartroite failure in the proparanda field, as
well as in the economic one.
*The Tricontinental Conference charged with 'Divisionism'".- Tito, by means of his
organ "Borba", said that the Tricontinental marked a new division of World Communiem,
as Yugoslav and Western European Parties had been excluded. A result of maneuvering
within the Sino-Soviet rift, the Havana parley has provoked a new clash, that between
Tito and the fool Fidel Castro, the clown who gets all the punches at the circus
arenat he is punished by China, despised by Russia and ignored by the Communists'
"Third Front".
"
3.
**
13″
*.*.
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_282.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
bis une qua* {} } ?> 133 2?lstoyama” in tanar -
'
I
January 13, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
KHABLA... UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
1) SOVIET SKI INSTRUCTOR DEFECTS IN SWEDEN.
2). U.S. SEES CHANCES FOR WAR WITH CHINA, SAYS WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT.
EDITORIALS:
"Words of Hope for a Suffering Cuba".- In his State of the Union message, L.B.J.
said that the U.S. is committed not to abandon Viet Nam because doing this would be
tantamount to unleashing war in S.E. Asia. L.B.J. is obviously committed to defend
democracy in general, and this includes the American Continent and, of courɛe, Cuba,
The President's speech is, therefore, a warm New Year's greeting to the struggling
people of Cuba.
"Timely Restatements By L.B.J.".- After carrying his peace offensive to every corner
of the world, to no avail because of the Communists' insistence in prolonging the
war, L.B.J. has made a timely restatement of U.S. policy in Viet Nam: before Con-
gress, the President repeated that the U.S. will not abandon Viet Nam, and he also
reminded the legislators that the U.S. are committed to defend freedom in Cuba.
January 14, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) LUNAR NEW YEAR MAY BRING VIET NAM CEASE-FIRE.
2) CASTRO TURNS DOWN GUYANA RICE, HAS NO DOLLARS TO PAY IT.
EDITORIALS:
"Deep-Sea Drafts in the Tricontinental".-
The Tricontinental was planned to have
ended Jan. 12 and accomplish a common, united line of revolutionary policy, with
common direction and funds. The Conference, however, has been extended, because
things have not come out the way the Reds expected.
i
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_286.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
EXPONÁLA
- 5 -
:
1
unteers" to Viet Nam, as he might get in the way of American determination and suf-
for the consequences.
"The Daggers Hidden Behind the Tricontinental".- The sessions of the Tricontinental
had hardly come to an end when the intrigues and rifts between the Communists came
out to the surface. In their official press, the Chinese have charged the Soviets
with having turned the Conference into an anti-Chinese plot. Castro, two days ear-
lier, had taken the dagger out of his sleeve and acted as the Soviets' barking hound
dog.
i
January 20, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) RED PLOT AGAINST COSTA RICA UNVEILED.
2) RED CHINESE ARMY POLITICAL BOSSES CALL FOR WAR READINESS.
EDITORIALS:
"The Americas Answer The Tricontinental Threats".- At the Tricontinental Conference,
Castro challenged the stability of the Americas and took an open war path by arousing
the Communists in a manner which he though would go unchallenged. Yet, representa-
tives of Latin gvts., such as Cabinet Minister Barrios, of Venezuela, have shown the
way to counter Castroite aggression. Precisely yesterday, it was Mr. Lincoln Gordon,
the new Asst. Secy. of State for Latin American Affairs who said that Cuba constitutes
a great threat to all American countries. This pronouncement may be said to represent
American though in the struggle against Communism.
"A Great Threat".- When Ambassador Gordon took office as Asst. Secy. of State for
Latin American Affairs, he reiterated that Cuba under Red domination means a grave
menace to the countries South of the border, and that this is a primary concer for
the U.S. This is still more the case after the Tricontinental Conference, and the
peoples of Latin America are determined to shake off this menace once and for all,
in order to put an end to aggression, terror, subversion, etc., all of which are plan
ned and financed by Red Cuba.
2. SUM GPS. YES, ADV

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_284.jpeg ---
14-00000
-3-
i
1
January 17, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) MEXICAN MEETS CUBAN COMMUNISM, RETURNS HOME DISAPPOINTED.
2) CUBANS SNEAK OUT OF ISLAND, COAST GUARD PICKS THEM UP IN CAY SAL.
EDITORIALS:
"A summary of Castro's speech at the Tricontinental".- Castro's speech revealed
the deepening of the division between the Chinese and the Russians, whom he called
on to unite. He violently charged the C.P. of Latin America with getting lost in a
"sea of theories", interpretations and tactics, and with unwillingness to go out
into the battlefield to face the dangers of open war. He attempted to answer charges
that he had abandoned the revolutioniste of Santo Domingo after exciting them to re-
volt, and justified himself with the fact that Cuba "is a small nation", lacking in
nuclear weapons. Lastly, he acknowledged the deep effect of anti-Communist propa-
ganda in Cuba and in Latin America, which propaganda ho charges of slandering his
regime.
"Fidel Castro at the closing of the Tricontinental".- Fidel Castro's desperate tone
had defeatist overtones when he admitted what he had never admitted before: the pos-
sibility that he may lose all or part of Cuba's territory. This was a defeatist
warning, perhaps made to insure a retreat without personal risks. As to Che, he
added further confusion to the issue. He was not really replying to the "imperial-
ists", as he said but to some of the delegates to the Tricontinental, who demanded
a clarification of Guevara's mysterious disappearance.
January 18, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) British Catholic Cardinal Blasts Polish Reds.
2) Latin Christian unionists denounce Castro Regime.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_280.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
:
-5-
to pose as a powerful warlord before the peoples of Latin America. He would like to
be acked to take part in peace negotiations. Therefore, he is after a naval catastrophe
that would put him in the headlines throughout the world as a victim of an "imperialism"
that has attacked one of poor little Red Cuba's ships. So, he risks the lives of Cuban
crews for this purpose. This wickedness explains the wave of defections by Cuban sea-
men.
i
I
"Soviet Aggression".- The Ovt. and press of Perú have labelled the statements made by
the Soviet delegate to the Tricontinental Conference as aggression. Likewise, the
Venezuelan Gvt. advised the use of force against Communist aggression. The aggressions
are not just against Perú or Venezuela, but against the Continent as a whole. There-
fore, the whole Continent should mobilize by declaring all Communist Parties ilegal
and by applying the ultimate sanctions foreseen by the Inter-American system of self-
defense against the Cuban Communist regime.
JANUARY 12, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) WASHINGTON, HANOI IN DIRECT CONTACT.
2
2) YUGOSLAVIAN PAPER BLAST TRICONTINENTAL PARLEY.
EDITORIALS:
"Chinese Reds Call Castro "A Liar".- On the eve of the Tricontinental Parley, Fidel
Castro sought to strike a hard blow at the Chinese Communists. On Moscow's orders, he
charged Red China with "economic aggression" against Cuba. With characteristic Asian
phlegm, the Chinese have replied to Castro's perfidious attacks by calling him a liar.
They claim that they never agreed to a long-term barter of rice for Cuban sugar. They
only agreed, they say, to exchange these products in 1965. For once, we must agree
with the Chinese Rede: Castro is indeed the biggest liar the world has known. Trade
agreements are written, clarified and specified. We are inclined to believe the
Chinese and to reject Fidel's candid explanation of a "misunderstanding".
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_285.jpeg ---
14-00000
LOBOKUD; n'am * GYRK
I
:
->
EDITORIALS:
"It's Not Propaganda, Fidel, It's The Truth".- We answer Castro's complaints against
democratic propaganda, pointing our that is consists not merely of propaganda, but
of the whole infamous truth about his regime. We avail ourselves of the circumstances
to connect the above with the statements made in Miami by Capt. Augusto M. Conzález,.
the skipper of the Cuban merchant flagship "Uvero", and the Chief Engineer, Roberto
Surroca, who defected in Ceylon because of the circumstances that prevail in Cuba.
.
"A Rival Within The Politburo".- Sergio del Valle, a Major of his Army and a member
of the Politburo, delivered a speech on Dec. 26th before the Provincial Committee of
the Party in Matanzas, and he openly contradicted what Castro constantly affirme. He
criticized extensively and enumerated the many failures of the regime. He took a
role as a national "guidance counselor" and pointed at that which he said should be
the political guiding principle of the Party, thereby overlooking Secretary General
Castro, who was hardly even mentioned. Few reports on this speech were carried by
the Cuban press, as del Valle seems to be becoming a rival to Fidel Castro.
January 19, 1966:
NEWSCAST:
1) RED CUBA, TRICONTINENTAL PARLEY CRITICIZED BY PEIFING.
2) TWO MORE INTELLECTUALS TO BE PUNISHED IN THE USSR.
EDITORIALS:
"Rusk Answers the Threats of the Tricontinental".- In his speech last Saturday, Cas-
tro summarized the "accomplishments" of the Tricontinental, stressing the unanimity
of the Communists in their will to conquer South Viet Nam. In the Philippines, Dean
Rusk th
than said that if the U.S. peace offensive failed, the Americans would find them
selves in the need to "crush North Viet Nam". This statement duly replied the Tri-
continental threats. Fidel might do well to reconsider his offers of arms and "vol-
s
T
-

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_287.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
97
"HABLA.. UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
October 19: "The Indonesian People Against the Communists". This arti- -
'cle breaks Cuban deadly silence concerning Indonesian events, and sum-
marizes and comments such events, emphasizing that the people and the
armed forces have performed the miracle of recovering democracy for Indo-
nesia. HISTORIC DETERMINISM turns against Communism, first in the Domin-
ican Republic, next in Algeria, now in Indonesia, and tomorrow in Cuba.
"Why Doesn't Fidel Talk of the Party's Reorganization?".- Right after the
news on the reorganization of the Party were confirmed, Castro offered to
let all dissatisfied Cubans out of the country. Among other things, this
offer served as a smoke screen to cover the purge which he had carried
out. Then, complete silence on the subject, so that no one would realize
that the Party has been placed under his absolute personal control. He
fears the reaction of the purged old Commies.
October 20: "Latin America Against Communism".- The Venezuelan Dock-
workers' Convention in Caracas, which had an international character, put
out Resolutions in which the workers of the Americas confirm their deter-
mination to fight communism.
"The Arrival of the Pro-Consul".- Gromyko's trip to Cuba is more than just
a visit by the Soviet Foreign Minister: it is an unannounced inspection
tour by the Pro-Consul to his Caribben colony. Of course, this trip can
bring nothing good for Fidel.
October 21: "Why is Gromyko in Havana?".- Gromyko, breaking all rules of
democracy, showed up in Havana. What for? Among the other problems faced
by Cuba, he showed up to solve the crisis undergone by the Cuban Communist.
"Old Guard", who have been politically executed by Castro.
att. to UFGA-24421
L
19-120-26
Lulen aurkik
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_288.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
"The Fuzzled Cheat".- Castro's "open-door" offer, which was just a bluff
which he hoped would not be accepted, has caught Fidel in a series of
traps which he has laid himself. He has had to take resource to a thousand
gimmicks and buts in order to keep Cuba from losing its entire population,
but he has been unable to keep Camarioca from becoming a plebiscite of
hostility against his regime.
October 22: "Fidel Castro's Despair".- After he was abandoned by the of-
ficers and soldiers of the Rebel Army, by the militia and by the people
of Cuba in general, Castro tries to seek refuge in the support of the
youth, which he flatters çonstantly to that end. If it is true that
Cuba's young people support Castro, we challenge him to allow draft-age
youths to leave the country if they wish.
"Che's Letter in Cuban Schools".-
Castro has ordered that Che's letter
be read and re-read in Cuban schools. The letter, which seems to have
been dictated by Fidel while his victim stood with a foot in the grave,
is a carbon copy of Stalin's procedures. Stalin also demanded that the
"purged" leave letters which he himself dictated, in order to instill the
cult to his personality in the minds of children and form the myth of his
own genius. Castro forgets that such Stalinist methods are still too re-
cent and much discredited.
October 23: "Gromyko and Castro's Woes".- This article emphasizes
Castro's deep concern over Gromyko's sudden appearance in Cuba, which
indicates that the Soviet Pro-Consul dropped in to tighten Castro-Com-
munist screws economically as well as politically.
"Corvalan is Still Castro's Top Foe Within Fan-American Communism”.—
Traditionally, the Chilean Communist Party has been the center of op-
:
:
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_29.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
23
1
TO
N.R.KINSMAN:fph
WH/COG/CA/EW
4163
1_JUNE_1967 _
ABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION
BY
CONFI
TO
8
PEL
14/106 8
✓
kelassificatičnj
SECRET .
JMWAVE
TYPIC AMSCROLL AMOT
RUUTING AND/ 08
MESSAGE FORM
20
TOTAL COPIES,
SECRET
INDEX
NO INDEX
DESTROY
☐ RETURN TO
☐ FILE IN CS PILE NO.
10
BRANCH
19-120-26v
RID COPY
INFO
FILE
, VR
El, WH 8
fdate and time Ristij
*2 143 Z
{alite]
Treference man.
CITE DIRECTOR 06662
REF: UFGA-27507 (4 MAY 1967)
.:T X
PLS RETRANSMIT COPY AMOT PROPOSAL FORWARDED BY TM-928258. HQS
COPY INADVERTANTLY DESTROYED.
Hill BROE
WILLIAM V. BROE
C/WHID
:
END OF MESSAGE
19-120-26
1Jnr 67
WH/COG/NO_Cationioush
EARL J. WILLIAMSON.
AC/WH/COG
j
COORDINATING OFFICERS
RELEASING OFFICER
SECRET
GROUP
Excluded from automatio
downgrading and
relation
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
1
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICE
COPY NO.
FILE RID
{pitol
7

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_289.jpeg ---
W
14-00000
1
§.
i
position to Castro's brand of Communism among the old-line Parties in
this Continent. While Castro has invested millions in subversion, Corva-
lan has patiently waited to capitalize on such investments and on Fidel's
own activities. Today more than ever, the old-line Communist Parties
throughout the Americas are in a hurry to displace Castro completely, and
stage a counter-coup right in Cuba, where Fidel has made a devastating
purge of the Old Guard.
October 25: "Castro's Memo to the Soviet Union".- A comment on the memo
presented by Castro to Gromyko concerning Cuba's needs with respect to
economy, oil, currency, sugar, transportation equipment, industrial units,
etc., in order that Cuba's economy may get rolling again. Gromyko's crisp,'
cold reply was that he would forward the demands to the soviet government.
"Mikoyan-Gromyko".- Soon it'll be three years since Mikoyan, in his
capacity as the Kremlin's Pro-Consul, travelled to Cuba to impose Soviet
decisions on the notoricus "missile crisis". Three years later, another
Pro-Consul, Gromyko, shows up in Havana, also to impose Soviet decisions
on the puppet. The Kremlin is making it plain for Fidel to understand
that he can't last a week longer unless he fully abides by Moscow's orders.
October 26: "Not Even the Soviet Union Can Save Castro".- This article
comments the internal situation of Cuba and Castro-Commúnism at the time
of Gromyko's departure from the Island. Mention is made of growing dis-
content, of restlessness and dissatisfaction among Cubans, plus the
destruction of Cuba's light industry and agriculture. Other woes of the
Castroites are elaborated on, and, in the end, we call on those who form
part of the Castro government, but who nevertheless love Cuba, to help
put an end to the Red monster and to the anguish of the people.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_291.jpeg ---
14-00000
#HARLA UNIDAD DEVOLUCIONARIA" (W.R.U.L.)
:
;
October 30, 1965: "Oil Worries the Havana Communist Regime".- A comment on the
statement by Engineer Alberto Queralt, who just arrived from Cuba, who, in his
capacity as a technician who held a high post in the Petroleum Concolidated, deducts
the possibility that Soviot deliveries of oil to Cuba may decrease. These statements
are confirmed by the interpretation of President Dorticos' own words, and by the
presence of a Cuban mission in Great Britain.
"A Concentration of Gorillac, Thugs and Informers".- In the reorganization of the
Party, Pidel Castro has undertaken the biggest concentration of gorillas, ever to
have taken the political leadership of any country in the world. Besides, he has
raised a good, number of thugs and gorillas to leadership positions. Such are the
men that Castro has found to lead the Party which he has made in his own likeness
in order to exert absolute, despotic, personal power over a nation.
November let, 1965: "There Will Be No Changes in the Blockade of Red Cuba".- A com-
ment on the rumors that U.S. policy on Cuba will "soften". It is indicated that
Washington, for humanitarian reasons, accepted Castro's parley to evacuate the spirit-
ually wounded. We also comment on the statement of a Washington official who said that
"the fear that the U.S. may alter its rolations with Cuba is unfounded (and) there is
no prospect for a change in our relations". We arrive at the conclusion that U.S.
policy on the subject will no vary: Castro will be economically strangled and there's
no future for Communism in this Continent. (piofio de las A-OCT.
67-31.)
What About Political Prisoners?".- Fidel Castro has taken a series of steps that
limit, by several means, the offer he made to allow dissatisfied Cubans to leave the
Island. Even though no public statement's have been made about the political prisoners,
it may be expected that this matter has been considered in the negotiations, and that
Fidel Castro must be forced to play fairly in order that he may not trade with the
agory and the hope of 70,000 political prisoners and with the hope and the anguish of.
their relatives.-
1
1
1
;
1
L

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_292.jpeg ---
piz
14-00000
"HABLA... UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA”
(W.R.U.L.)
October 29, 1965: "Russia Rebuffs Castro".- A comment on the news that
Cuba and the USSR have signed an agreement to send 7 engineers and 50
technicians to the Caribbean Island. It is pointed out that, substantial
ly, such is the Soviet Union's reply to the request for technical and
financial assistance for Cuba's reconstruction and for the sugar crop.
1
"Brazil and the Dominican Republic".- The situation in Brazil and the
Dominican Republic shows that it is not enough to face up to Communist
aggressions, but that energetic, precautionary measures must be taken
as well to neutralize the subversive threat and guarantee democratic
stability. On the other hand, the Hemisphere's problems must be focus-
sed in their entirety, and action must be taken against the source of
subversion in Communist Cuba.
L
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_290.jpeg ---
14-00000
,
"When the Present is Unbearable...".- In view of the unbearable, desperate
reality faced by the people of Cuba under the Castro regime, the tyrant
promises paradise in 20 years. In such vertigo, he goes as far as to pro-
mise laurel crowns for Cuban sportsmen in the 1972 Olympic Games. He has
annihilated all the sports in Cuba and the country has been eliminated
from all international competitions because it makes a means for sub-
version out of sports. Fortunately, by 1972 Fidel Castro will be mean
no more to the Cubans than the bitter memory of a tyrant who no longer
exists.
"
+44
es
7343

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_293.jpeg ---
14-00000
M W
:
2.B THE MIAMI HERALD
Friday, Dec. 81, 1985
Cuba Aid
Given to
N. Viets
Ship Weapons,
Defector Says
By CARLOS MARTINEZ
Of Our Latin America Staff
A Cuban captain who
walked off his ship with
three of his officers at a Jap.
anese port four days ago
charged Thursday in Miami
that Cuban vessela lake
weapons to North Viet Nam
"three or four" times every
six months.
The captain. Francisco
Cobas Oxes, 46, told a press
conference called by Cuban
exiles that "all Cuban ships
have orders to carry war
materiel to North Viet Nam
to help the North Vietnam-
ese effort.”
The Cuben Embassy in
Japan, said Cobas, is acting
as coordinator for all Viet
Nam-bound shipments taken
at Communist ports in Asia.
The four Cuban defectors
of the
the 7,900-ton freighter
Aracelio iglesina were flown
to San Francisco last Tues-
day. There they gave U.S.
agrate their account of how
Fidel Castro's ships carry
Red Chinese arma to the
Viet Cong. They arrived in
Miami Wednesday,
•
Shortly before Chhas'
press conference, the Aracel-
in Iglesias sailed three days
behind schedule for Commu-
nist China)
China reportedly to
pick up military hardware
for the North Vietnamese. It
was being skippered by the
second mage, on orders from
Cuba.
"The Cuban Embassy in
Tokyo had
had secretely ar
ranged for the Aracelio
Iglesias to take a shipment
of war materiel from North
Korea to North Viet Nam,"
charged Cobas.
Nevertheless he said plans
were changed at the last min-
ute and he was "hastily or-
dered" to pick up the ship-
ment of weapons in Shang-
hai instead. It was then
when the four decided to
defect.
"The xhip that sail from
Cuba with sugar are ordered
to pick up the weapons after
unloading the sugar at Ja-
pan." it! Cobas, adding
that the pickups take place
only at North Korean and
Red Chinese ports "because
of their geographical situa-
lion,"
The short, articulate sea.
man also charged that the
Cuban government keeps a
small intelligence detail on
each of its merchant ships.
They are members of the G-
2. Castro's deaded secret
police.
"For some reason, the G-2
man on board is usually the
radio and telegraph opera-
tor. In the Aracelio Iglesias
we had a second G-2 man
disguised as the fourth engl-
neer, even though he had no
. training or ability to per
form his duty."
i
1
i
'
$
:
|
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_294.jpeg ---
*
14-00000
HR Press release
A PRESS SERVICE FROM
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
OFFICEI
10 S.E. 9 St.
MAILING ADDRESS
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
PHONE:
373 - 8033
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
--
}
DEFECTING CUBAN SEAMEN EXPLAIN THEIR DECISION HERE.
Skipper, three officers left Cuban freighter in Japan. Cuban
logistical support of Viet Roda donounced. Crewmen reluctant
to transport war materials to North Viet. Role of Castro's
Embassy in Tokyo. Cuban Reds withhold ship's itinerary to de
ceive the Japanese. Spying on board. Bureaucratic chaos re-
sults in damage to Cuba's foreign supplies.
A Cuban skipper who loft his ship in Japan Dec. 26 confirmed today in Miami that
Castro's logistical support of Viet Nam Rods was the main reason for his defection.
In a press conference held at the Biscayne Room of the Hotel HcAllister, Francisco.
Cobas, the defecting captain of the Cubán freighter "Aracelio Iglesias", told news-
mon why he and three of his fellow officers decided to seek asylum in the United
States.
The press conference was arranged by UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA, a Miami-based Cuban
group whom Cobas approached upon his arrival from Japan. Cobas said that he had
asked the U.R. to help him get in touch with the prose so that he and his shipmates
could denounce Cuban maneuvers to help the Viet Cong.
During the conference, Cobas was flanked by Antonio Arias, Mario Pérez and Humberto
Fernández, the three other defecting officers of the "Aracelio Iglesias". Cobas,
introduced by U.R. Secretary General Mario Seiglic, spoke for the group. Said Co-
bas that he and his shipmates had refused to run the risks of transporting war mate-
rials to North Viet Nam, particularly since they were convinced that such transpor-
tation was wrong. Cobas added that all Cuban veusola have been ordered to take mil
itary cupplies to North Viet Nam from other Asian Communict ports, and that the Cub
an Embassy in Tokyo serves as coordinator for all such shipments.
Referring to his former ship, Capt. Cobas explained that the Embassy had ordered
the "Aracelio Iglesias" to sail to a North Korean port and to await further instrug
tions there. The Cuban diplomats withheld the ship's itinerary and declared that
the "Aracelio" would return to the Japanese port of Yahata before proceeding to
North Viet Nam. By pretending that the ship would come back to Japan, they hoped
to deceive the crew and reassure the Japanese as to the cargo and the use to which
the ship was being put. The truth was, however, that, while in North Korea, the
"Aracelio" was to receive orders to load a cargo of war supplies and sail directly
from there to North Viet Nam.
According to Cobas, this could not be done in the end because the Tokyo Embassy was
warned at the last moment that the North Korean port of Chinnampo was blocked by
ice. The "Aracelio" was now ordered to pick up another military shipment at Shan--
ghai and take it to North Viet Nam. It was then that Cobas and his shipmates dec-
ided to walk out.
Cobas went on to explain that logistical support to the North Vietnamese was one of
the two tasks assigned to the new Cuban envoy in Tokyo, a fanatically loyal Commu--

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_298.jpeg ---
14-00000
SAND MEETAI ARBA started smak + + Orchi£*JAS? *<***@#%$********Ì 1 Big Tits, ha ‚¯‹ {% \ --=
-3
Luego de estas declaraciones, los periodistas presontes formularon al Capitán
bas numorosas preguntas, la mayoría de las cuales se referían al uso de las naves de
Cuba Roja para llevar suministros a los comunistes del Viet Cong. Todos los repor
toros asistentes no mostraron vivamento interesados en este asunto, por cuanto dicha
ayuda cubana so traduco más o monos directamento en la pérdida de vidas norteamerica
nas en ese país del Sudosto asiático.
Miami, Diciembre 31, 1965
Ref: 210
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_295.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
-
=
1.
nist named Manuel Jorge Cuevo Menéndes, whose previous job was to run concentra--
tion camps in the Isle of Pines.
The Cuban skipper referred to ill-treatment of Cuban seamen by the Castro regime,
mentioning among other instances the constant spying on board by C-2 men; prefer-
ential Customs treatment given Communist-Bloc sailors; and the ridiculously low lo-
cal-currency allowance of 25 per week given to the Cubans while in foreign ports.
Elaborating on the issue of espionage, Capt. Cobas revealed that the radio and tel-
egraph operator is usually the G-2 man on board. As captain of the "Aracelio", Co-
bas himsolf was forced to surrender the mail of supposedly "disloyal" crewmen to
one of the spies assigned to his ship.
As regards operation conditions of the Cuban merchant fleet, Cobas told newsmen --
that the two basic problems confronted by Cuban shipping are the obsolete Soviet
equipment installed in most boats and the excessive bureaucratic red tape and dis--
organization. As example of the latter, he mentioned the fact, that the Cuban buy-
ing agency seldom informs the shipping coordinating office of the dates oh which
the merchandise is to be picked up at a foreign port. Last-minute notices and sub-
sequent offorts to find chips usually moe' failure, with the result that the seller
must pay higher warehouse costs. This he caused many foreign firms to either re-
fuse to trade with Castro or to impose extremely harsh terms to protect themselves
from the costly effects of the Communists' unreliability.
Capt. Francisco Cobas then revealed that he understood that a vast "reorganization"
of the Cuban Havy was undertaken early this fall. Most officers, he said, were dis
charged on the grounds of suspected "disloyalty" to the government. Incidentally,
added Cobas, some retired Army officers who have had no naval experience, have also
been assigned to the merchant marine. Cobas assured his audience that their deci-
sion to quit was made of their own free will and that no one had pressured them
into it. He denounced Communist oppression of his homeland and said that he and his
three shipmates refused to keep serving under it.
3
->
Following Capt. Cobas' statement, the newsmen asked him numerous questions. Most
of these referred to the issue of Cuban boats being used to carry war supplies to
Việt Nam, which was quoted by the Cuban seamen as the chief reason for their defec-
tion. All journalists present showed great interest in this matter, as such Cuban
assistance to Viet Nam Reds more or less directly results in the loss of American -
lives in that Asian country.
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
754
+
Ref.: 205
Miamt, December 30, 1965.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_297.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
_2_
7.
i
directamente hacia Viot Nam dol Norte.
Según Cobas, esto no pudo hacerse debido a que, a última hora, la Embajada reci
bió el aviso de que el puerto norcoreano de Chinnanpó estaba bloqueado por el hielo.
En vista de ello, so ordenó al "Aracelio" levar anclas rumbo a Shanghai para roco -
gor allí otro cargamento do matorial de guerra y conducirlo al Viet Nam. Fué enton
ces que Cobas y sus compañeros decidieron abandonar al buque.
A continuación, Cobas pasó a explicar que el apoyo logístico a los Viet Cong
constituye una de las tareas encomendadas al nuevo embajador cubano en Tokyo, un co-
munista fanático nombrado Manuel Jorge Cuervo Monéndoz que tuvo a su cargo la admi-
nistración de varios campos de concentración on Isla de Pinos.
Refiriéndose a los malos tratos que reciben los marinos cubanos, Cobas moncionó
la constante vigilancia a quo están sometidos a bordo por el G-2 comunista, así como
a las consideraciones especiales de aduana que se dan a los tripulantes de buques de
otros paises comunistas y a la ridícula cantidad ($5 semanales) en monoda local que
se da a los marinos cubanos para sus gastos en puertos extranjeros. Detallando la
cuestión de la vigilancia, revoló el capitán Cobas que on la mayoría de los buques
cubanos al G-2 do a bordo suele ser al radiotelegrafista. Como capitán del "Arace-
lio Iglesias", el propio Cobas so vio obligado a entregarlo a otro agente policíaco
dostacado a bordo toda la correspondencia de ciertos tripulantes supuestamente des-
leales al régimon..
También dijo Cobas a los periodistas que los principales problemas que confronta
la navegación cubana los constituyen los equipos soviéticos anticuados instalados en
muchos buques y las complicaciones y confusiones burocráticas. Como ejemplo de esto
último, señaló Cobas que la agencia oficial de compras del régimen cubano casi nunca
comunica a la coordinadora de fletes (CUFLET) la fecha en que deborá cargarse alguna
mercancía en puerto extranjero. Dicha fecha no se avisa hasta última hora, fracasan
do así los intentos de CUFLET para conseguir buque. Como consecuencia de esto, el -
vendedor extranjero ve notablemonte aumentados sus costos de almacón, y esto ha he.
cho que muchas firmas extranjeras bien se abstengan de comerciar con la tiranía roja
o impongan términos leoninos de venta para precaverse de los costosos efectos de la
irresponsabilidad comunista.
El capitán Cobas reveló que, según tenía entendido, la Marina de Guerra de Cuba
Roja sufrió una amplia "reorganización" a principios del otoño. Según dijo, muchos
oficiales fueron licenciados por su supuesta "deslealtad" al régimen. Los más afor-
tunados fueron transferidos a la marina mercante, a la que también se ha incorporado
a muchos oficiales retirados del Ejército que carecen por completo de experiencia na
val. Los restantes oficiales licenciados de la Marina de Guerra han sido fusilados
o recluidos en prisión.
t
El Capitán Cobas aseguró a los presentes que su decisión y la de sus compañeros
era al producto de su libérrima voluntad, no habiéndose ejercido sobre ellos la me
nor presión. Cobas denunció la opresión comunista en su patria y añadió que ni él
ni sus tres compañeros podían seguir sirviendo a la causa roja.
1
i
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_296.jpeg ---
14-00000
✓
CUR
boletín informativo
UN SERVICIO DE PRENSA DEL
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
OFICINAS:
10 S.E. 9 St.
DIRECCION POSTAL:
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
TELEFONO:
373-8033
771
MARINOS CUBANOS QUE DESERTARON EXPLICAN CU DECISION EN MIAMI
24
El capitán y tres oficiales abandonaron
un carguero cubano on Japón.- Denuncian
apoyo logístico de Cuba Roja a los Viet
Cong.- Renuente la tripulación a trans-
portar material bólico a Viet Nam.- El
papel de la Embajada castrista en Tokyo.
Ocultaron los rojos cubanos el itinera
rio para engañar a los japoneses.- Espio
naje a bordo.- El desorden burocrático
perjudica a los suministradores de Cas
tro en el extranjero.
Un capitán cubano que abandonó su nave en Japón el 26 de diciembre confirmó hoy
on Miami que el apoyo logístico de Castro a los rojos de Viet Nam había sido el prin
cipal motivo de su deserción. En una conferencia de prensa colobrada en un céntrico
hotel de esta ciudad, Francisco Cobas, capitán del carguero cubano "Aracelio Iglesias"
explicó a los periodistas por qué él y sus compañeros de oficialidad decidieron soli-
citar acilo en los EE.UU.
La conferencia de prensa fué convocada por UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA, organización cụ.
bana radicada aquí a la que se dirigió Cobas a su llegada del Japón. Cobas dijo que
habia solicitado la ayuda de U.R. a fin de ponerse en contacto con los periodistas y
denunciar las maniobras de Cuba Roja en favor de los rojos vietnamitas.
Durante la conferencia, se encontraban junto a Cobas los otros tres oficiales asi-
lados, nombrados Antonio Ruiz Arias (Primer Oficial), Mario Julio Pérez Girón (Jefe
de Máquinas), y Humberto R. Fernández (Sobrecargo). El capitán Cobas fue presentado
por el Dr. Mario Seiglie, Secretario General de UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA.
Dijo Cobas que tanto él como sus compañeros de tripulación se negaban a correr el.
riesgo que supone transportar material bélico a Viet Nam del Norte, máxime cuando a -
brigaban la convicción de que dicha actitud del gobierno cubano es altamente condena-
ble. Añadió Cobas que todos los buques cubanos tienen órdenes de llevar suministros
de guerra a Viet Nam del Norte desde otros puertos comunistas del Asia, y que la Enha
jada cubana en Tokyo funge como coordinadora de tales embarques.
Refiriéndose al "Aracelio Iglesias", que capitaneaba, Cobas reveló que la Embaja-
da cubana en Japón había dispuesto que el "Aracelio" zarpara rumbo a un puerto norco-
reano y aguardara allí nuevas órdenes. Los diplomáticos castristas retuvieron el iti
nerario del buque y declararon que el mismo volvería al puerto japonés de Yahata an -
tos de seguir rumbo a Viet Nam dol Norte. Al hacer ver que el buque regresaría al Ja
pon, los comunistes se proponían engañar a la tripulación y tranquilizar a las autori
dades japonesas respecto del cargamento del buque y del uso que se iba a dar al mismo.
La realidad, empero, era que, durante la estancia del "Aracelio" en Corea del Norte,
el mismo habría de recibir la ordan de cargar un embarque de material bélico y zarpar

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
TC
INFO
FROM
i
DISPATCH
Chief, WH Division
4
2P
CLASSIFICATION
ACTION
SECRET
XX
MARKED FOR INSÆNING
NO INSERING BEZALO
ORLY QUALIFIED LASA
CAN ILLA INTLANG
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Operational/ TYPIĊ/AMSCROLL
Termination of AMSCROLL Personnel
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
AR: See paragraph 3.
MICROFILM
1. The AMSCROLL activity was terminated 31 August 1967
and all operations ceased at that time.
2.
✓
The following AMSCROLL employees were terminated
offective 31 August 1967 and were given a termination settle-
ment of three months' salary.
a.
N
Fernando ALLOZA (radio script writer)
1
b. Miss Diana FERNANDEZ-RUBIO Moller
(secretary)
c.
Juan Manuel ESPINOSA-CONDE (clork)
d. Dr. Luis Antonio RODRIQUEZ-CACERES
(stock clerk)
e.
Alfredo HERNANDEZ-LOVIO, (messenger)
n
0 201
nuci
f. Dr. Manuel *MARINAS, Carmona
f.Dr.
g.
DPOB: 26 December 192Q
Manzanillo, Oriente
(radio script writer)
No 0731
Mrs. Ana Maria
BARROSO, Gomez
DPOB: 19 June 1938
Cienfuegos, Las Villas, Cuba
201-286580
201-753918
--
201-751327
201-754907
201-789623
no 201
no 201
h.
(typist)
10
Wo 201
Rene GALIS-MENENDEZ
DPOB: 23 June 1923
Matanzas, Cuba
(clerk)
---
MICROFILMED
MAR 8 1968
no 201
CONTINUED
DOC MICRO, SER.
CS COFT
Distribution:
7 - WH/COG
CROSS REFERENCE TO 201-286580
201-754907
201-789623
201-751327-201-753918
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-29593
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
FEB 27 1258-
DATE
23 February 1968
HOS FILE NUMBER
19-128.26
19-120-26/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_299.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
chirmater and I have requested political asylum from the United States
because we are convinced that Cuban support of the Communist war in Vietnam is
wrong and we refuse is run the ricks of transporting war material to North Viet
Nam.
:
All Cuban ships have orders to carry cargo to North Vietnam to help the
North Vietnamese war effort. The Cuban Embassy in Japan is acting as the coor-
dinator for all shipments of war material to North Vietnam via Cuban ships from
Communist ports in Asia. The Cutan Embassy in Tokyo had secretly arranged for
the Aracolio Iglosias to take a shipment of war materials from North Korea to
North Vietnam. In order to hide their intentions, the Embassy arranged that the
Aracelio itinerary be kept up in the air until the last possible moment; then to
fool the crew and the Japanese they gave the story the ship would return to Japan
to load tin cargo at Yahata and then proceed on route to North Vietnam. In real-
ity, wo were to receive instructions on itinerary while in North Korea telling
us to proceed directly to North Vietnam after loading the war supplies.
At the last moment, however, the Embassy was informed that the port of
Chinnampo was blocked by ice. The Cuban Embassy then hastily arranged for us to
pick up a shipment of arms in Shangai previously scheduled for another Cuban
boat about the end of January.
Logistical support to the North Vietnamese is one of the two tasks assigned
to Mr. Manuel Jorge Cuervo, the now Cuban Ambassador to Japan. His other func-
tion is to erase the bad effects on Japanese-Cuban trade caused by the defection
of the former trade Counselor to Japan, Gilberto Alemany. The Cuban government
is very concerned about the prospect of declining trade since already some comp-
anies that formerly traded with Cuba, will no longer do so openly.
In general, I may say that members of the Cuban merchant marine live under
unbearable conditions. The treatment we receive is so bad that no one feala
like cooperating with the marine purposes of the regime, even in the few cases
where there might be no ideological incompatibility involved.
As examples of this treatment I may mention the constant spying on board
by members of the "G-2". For some reason, the "G-2" man on board is usually the
radio and telegraph operator. In the "Aracelio" we had one by the name of Eduar
do Sánchez who was a notorious spy. Aboard we had another man called Manuel Rúa
Rodriguez who was imposed as the Fourth Engineer, even though he had no training
or ability to perform such duties. As Captain of the "Aracelio", I was ordered
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
TELEFONO FR 3–8033
431
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
10
DISPATCH ☐
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
INFO.
Chief, WH; Chief, NE
THOM
CLASSIFICATI
S-E-C-R-S-T
SUBJECT
Acting Chief of Station, Athens
TYPIC/AMSCROLL/THUNIFORM
○ Revised Mailing List for Greece
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION:
FYI
REF
:
UFGA-26541, 8 December 1366
X
PROCESSIN
MASATO FOR INDEXES
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
[ONLY QUALIFIED CEST
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
MICROFILM
?
1.
Per Para two of Reference, we are forwarding under
Ne
separate cover a revised mailing list for AMSCROLL'я use.
have no additions or deletions to those addresseey listed in
Reference with the indicator "(bl.)"; they should continue
receiving coples of the economic reports issued by AMSCROLL.
The addressees forwarded with this dispatch should receive
coples of economic reports, of releases concerned with maritime
matters, and of any other newspaper clippings and editorials
which are considered appropriate by AMSCROLL and/or Station
JMWAVE; these addressees replace those listed in Reference with
the indicators "(econ)" and "(mar.)”.
3. We believe the above revision will ensure a more
effective MHSPAWN use of AMSCROLL's materials during this
period of press censorship imposed by the present Greek
coup leadership.
ler.
Attachment:
As stated above USC(and)
Distribution:
CROSS REFERENCE TO
2 COS/JMWAVE w/att
-
C/WH w/att
Filowlar
2 - C/NE w/att
CS COPY
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
EKAA-16273
CLASSIFICATION
S-B-C-R-E-T
ARNOLD B. TIMMERILAUS
WALTER D. NEFLY
19-180-26
DATE
12 June 1967
HOS FILE NUMBER
19-129-36/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_303.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
1
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
INTERVIEW.
SECRET
IN 24377 PAGE 2017
RID/MIS
2. TEXT OF STATEMENT. ALSO INCLUDED INFED "7CR - RF³°³
L. PRESS
43 Alt
RELEASE BEING ISSUED THIS DATE AND WHICH WILL BE AIR
NAILED ITS LIST. VIA AMLYRIC-1, PRESS INTERVIEW AND
EDITORIAL COMMENT ARRANGED FOR RADIO COVERAGE VIA AMTHIGH,
AYBROTH, AMTUMOR EVENING 30 DEC. AMHIM PREPARING SPECIAL
PRESS RELEASE FOR 31 DEC. AMSTRUT-2 WILL PREPARE TAPED
INTERVIEW FOR 2 JAN PROGRAM.
3. LOCAL AND INTERNATIONAL PRESS COVERAGE SHOULD APPEAR
31 DEC AS AFP, UPI AND AP HAVE FILED STORIES. WILL FORWARD
CLIPS AVAILABLE HERE FOR REPLAY.
SECRET.
CFN 8166 8122 1 AP UPI ABC TV VOA AFP IGLESIAS NORTH VIET NAM CUBAN
NAVY G-2 2 VOA AMSCROLL VIA AMLYRIC-1 VIA AMTHIGH AMBROTH AMTUMOR
33 AMHIM 31 AMSTRUT-2 2 31 AFP UPI AP
BT
NNNN
SECRET
L
s
:
1
:
11

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_302.jpeg ---
14-00000
si
:
19-120-16
INDEX:
YFS ☐ NO
ASY TO FILE NO.
X-REP TO FILE NO.
FILF RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH
DESTROY
7"
$10.
FROM
JI WAVE
ACTION
TOTAL COPIES 35
SECRET
-CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
31
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
114/08
INFO
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
UNIT
☐ Issue ☐ SLOTTE ☑ TUILD C5/00
TIME
2010 D
FILE VR, CS/DO, FER, SAVAZ, CT, CL/OPS, FI, EI/24, CAZ, CA/ARUP, CA/04
ECRET 3823492
WH/C/ES
3
PRIORITY DIR INFO TOKY CITE WAVE 8166
ARUTHACT
✗
NO NIACT
1
TYPIC ZRWAGON
1
PEF WAVE 8122.
31 Dec 55 IN 24377
PRESS CONFERENCE PER PARA 1 REF HELD AS SCHED UL ED
WITH THUS FAR FAVORABLE RESULTS.
APPROX TWENTY REPS ALL MEDIA
PRESENT INCLUDING AP, UPI, ABC AND TWO LOCAL TV STATIONS, VOA,
AFP AND APPROPRIATE STATION ASSETS.
ITH
TONE OF CONFERENCE FRIENDLY.
WITHIN TWO HOURS STORY ON LOCAL RADIO WHICH STRESSED
THREE POINTS: OFFICERS BROUGHT TO POINT
THESE.
OF DEFECTION DUE FACT IGLESIAS CARRYING MILITARY CARGOS TO NORTH
VIET NAM, PRESENT MORALE AND CONDITION CUBAN NAVY VERY POOR DUE
IN PART TO WHOLESALE OFFICER PURGE AND REPLACEMENT THESE OFFICERS
BY "LAND-LUBBER" ARMY OFFICERS, MERCHANT MARINE IN SAME STATE
DUE G-2 HARASSMENT OF CREWS AND POOR CONDITION OF SHIPS.
(AND OTHER POINTS INCLUDING PARA 2 READ INCLUDED IN PREPARED
STATEMENT WHICH HANDED PRESS REPS. IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING
CONFERENCE OFFICERS MET IN PRIVATE WITH VOA REP TO TAPE AN
19-120-26
31 Die 65

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_301.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
14
.
- 3-
The government purchasing organization buye merchandise from foreign companios,
but fails to inform CUFLET of the date on which the cargo is to be loaded. All
attempts to establish this are to no avail. Then one day the buying agency
-
serves last-minute notice that the merchandise will be ready for loading.
CUFLET takes pains to find a vessel in time but, more often than not, its hasty
efforts are in vain. In the meantime, the seller abroad grows impatient, as he
has long fulfilled his part of the deal and must continue to pay warehouse costs
because of a delay that is no fault of his.
This happens all the time, to the extent that many foreign firms refuse to
deal with such an undependable customer as the Cuban government, or, foreseeing
the damages they may come to them because of such inefficiency they impose the
harshest solling terms.
The unrest and chaos that I have described is not peculiar to the merchant
fleet. I do not know many details about this because I have been out at sea most
of the time since I first heard of it, but I understand that the Cuban Navy was
also in such turmoil that practically all its officers were discharged early whis
fall. It is said that some of the dismissed naval officers were assigned to the
merchant marine, and my men and I know a few instances. It is even true that
Army officers with no naval experience are being appointed to high naval posi-
tions. However, it is most likely that many of the purged officers will have
been shot or imprisoned. Such is the Cuba of today.
Lastly, we wish to emphasize that our decision to seek asylum in the United
States, has been made of our own free will. No have been pressured into this deci
∙sion by no one. Our consciences no longer permit us to serve the cause of a Com
munist Cuba. Like hundreds of Cubans before us, we who love Cuba deeply cannot
longer andure the tyranny with which she is afflicted.
We appreciate with all our heart the help received from UNIDAD REVOLUCINARIA
and we also wish to thank the gentlemen of the Press assembled here, for the at-
tention given us.
i
t
F
Miami, 30 de Diciembre de 1965.
Francisco Cobas.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_305.jpeg ---
14-00000
1121
TAGE ZOF 7.
IN 23377
NT
:
t
AL
460 INCLUDE POINTS PARA 3 REF.
RID/MIS
ALSO WISH TO INCLUDE A SPECIFIC STATEME
FEB 14 3 16 PM '66
FROM QUSAILOR-42 REGARDING UNRELIABILITY CUBAN SHIPPING DUE POOR
MECHANICAL CONDITION, INADEQUATELY TRAINED CREWS AND INCOMPETENT
DIRECION FROM HAVANA.
SECRET
CFN: 812 65111 1 AMSCROLL MHVIPER NOT TAKE AMWORD-1-2-3
1103 30 DEC TV AMHIM AMICE ANLYRIC-1 29 DEC A 2 QUSAILOR-42
JAPAN -42 3 A -42 CUBAN HAVANA
BT
NNNN
RID/M
FEB 16 1 36 PH '66
}
i
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_300.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2
}
t
by the government shipping concern "Vasticas" to give Rúa all possible cooperat
ion in the fulfillment of his functions. Rda then came to see me and asked,
among other things, that I surrender to him the incoming and outgoing mail of
certain specific crewmen who were suspected of being against the government,
Another instance of 111-treatment which Culan seamen resent is the discrimi
nation to which we are subject by the Cuban Customs as compared to the preferṛ--
tial treatment they accord to foreign sailors, particularly those from behind
the iron curtain. Most everything we tring from abroad to alleviate the scarcity
suffered by our families is confiscated at the Customs House.
Still other reasons for disgust are the many cuts and discounts made from our
already low pay and, very especially, the ridiculously low amount of foreign cur
rency that we are allowed when we sail atroad. For spending money in foreign.
ports, all we got in local currency is the equivalent of $5 per week which, of
course, are deducted from our basic salaries. In applying this restriction, no
distinction is made between the crewuren or the various officer ranks. It is 5
for everyone.
Because of all this, and because of the terrible conditions under which
Communism keeps our homeland, most Cutan sailors and officers are staunch anti-
Communists. The Government knows this, but nevertheless they must employ what
they call "the reactionaries" because of the scarcity of other trained personnel
to man Cuban boats. Their only choice is to spy on us constantly, as I have
just explained.
!
As to the operating conditions of the Cuban merchant fleet, it is worth
mentioning that Polish ships, which make yp a sizable proportion of Cuban ship-
ping, are supplied with Soviet-made equipment which the Russians have long dis-
carded as obsolete. Again, my own ship is an example. The "Aracelio" was com-
pleted as recently as 1963 in a Polish shipyard. Yet, its radar equipment is so
obsolete that it is simply not used, since we could never find the parts to re-
pair it when it broke. A German technician told my Chief Mate here that it must
have been a World-War II unit.
Excessive bureaucratic red tape and disorganization is another serious
problem confronted by Cuban shipping and which often results in considerable
damage to those firms that trade with the Castro tyranny. I will illustrate
this. The Cuban government agency responsible for arranging maritime transpor-
tation for merchandise bought abroad is the "Empresa Cubana de Fletes" (CUFLET).
'
A
1-14
48% 1997

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_304.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐ YES ☐ NO
SIFY TO FILE
JARER-TO-FILE-NO. 17-126
FILE MID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☑
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ImWAVE
ACTION
INF
4/c8
FILE, VR,
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
TOTAL COPITS AS
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
-
SECRET
✓
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
WH/C
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
☑ELETTE ☐ TURCO
☑ RID COPY ☐
TIME
1540
ve, C5/20, FE 8, SAVA Z, CT, CI/OPG, FI, FE/04, C42, CA/PROP, C4/04,
:
SECRET 291931Z
PRIORITY DIR INFO TOKY CITE WAVE 8122
TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF: DIR 62111
BLI
29 DEC 55 IN 23377
+
1. RE PARA 1 REF BELIEVE AMSCROLL SPONSORSHIP MORE SUITABLE
AND LOGICAL IN VIEW ITS DAILY EMPHASIS UPON MHVIPER ACTIONS, ITS
BEING KNOWN TO DEFECTING OFFICERS, AND ITS EXPERIENCE WITH PRESS
CONFERENCES AND PUBLIC EY. AMSCROLL PARTICIPATION TO BE LIMITED TO
ORGANIZING CONFERENCE AND PRESENTING OFFICERS. IT WILL NOT TAKE
CREDIT FOR DEFECTIONS. AMWORD-1, -2 AND -3 HAVE BEEN BRIEFED RE
E
AMSCROLL ROLE IN SURFACING AND HAVE ARRANGED FOR SPACE FOR PRESS
CONFERENCE AT 1130 HOURS 32 DEC. LOCAL AND INTERNATIONAL PRESS,
RADIO AND TV (INCLUDING WAVE MEDIA ASSETS SUCH AS AMHIM, AMICE, AMLYRIC-1).
:
TO BE ALERTED EVENING 29 DEC A HIGH LEVEL DEFECTOR TO BE AVAILABLE.
IDENTITIES WILL BE WITHHELD UNTIL CONFERENCE.
2° RE PARA 2 REF PRESENT PLAN CALLS FOR AMSCROLL REPS TO MEET
WITH QUSAILOR-42 TO WORK OUT DETAILS STATEMENT. TO BE READ AND GIVEN
t
PRESS WHICH TO SOME EXTENT WILL HAVE TO FOLLOW STATEMENT ISSUED JAPAN.
WILL USE MILITARY CARGOS RATHER THAN ARMS WHICH CONSISTENT WITH LOCAL
PRESS COVERAGE THUS FAR.
SAILOR
ASSUMING QUSAILOR-42 CONCURRENCE WILL
SETTET
19-120-26
29 Dec 66
4

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_306.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDEXT ☐ 'YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
N.RE TO FILE NO.
19-120 26
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
25/30 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
30
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TIME
ACTI
INFO
JMWAVE
WH/C8
✓ RID COPY
ADVANCE COPY
☐ ☐ COTTER ☐ PUDEO]
FILE, UR, WHS, CAZ, CA/PROP, cilicz, Nele
SECRET 2919342
DIR INFO RIOD CITE WAVE 8123
TYPIC MHSPAWN
PEFS: A. DIR 67579 ✈
*
111/4/83
B. TM 772925
C.
UFCA 24163
29 Dec 0523371
PER PARA TWO REF A REQUEST, JMWAVE POUCHED REF 8 BULKY
MATERIALS TO HAS FOR FORWARDING TO RIOD. SPECIAL AMSCROLL STUDY
AND OTHER SELECTED MATERIALS POUCHED RIOD REF CÂ
SECRET X REQUESTED WAVE CAGIE MATERIAL
CFN: 8123 67579 772926 24163 A JMWAVE B HGS AMSCROLL C
ST
SECRET
ATATUTAT
i
19-120-26
29 Peck5
?

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_308.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
1
SECRET
Sy
CFN 8097 5937 5941 WAVE A TV ETC AEGIS ANSCROLL SAN FRANCISCO.
IGLESIAS CUBAN AMWASP-1 CP ANFRAME-1
PASE 20F2
N/2/1974
BT
:
N
NNN
SEGAET
)
L

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_307.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
INDEX: ☐ YES ☐ no
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
Jarweve
ACTION
WH/C8
INFO
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COP 184
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY ☐ ... ☐ ☑.
132.
19-1249/3
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
EJ
UNIT
MO
EL
IS
ee
RR
TIME
C500 2200
FILE, VR, FE8, & I/OPS, 1/102, 9/08, 12, F2/04, CDC, CAZ, CA/tes
-1/04; DoY, D3, CS/DO
:
t
}
:
SECRET 2723552
PRIORITY DIR INFO PRIORITY TOKY CITE WAVE 3797
NO NIACT
TYPIC RACON
REF A.
TOKY 5927 /1N. 21434)
B.
TOKY 5341/IN 2/678)
21994
1. HAVE PLANS MEET SUBJECTS REF A UPON ARRIVAL WAVE AREA AND
REMOVE TO SAFEHOUSE FOR APPROX ONE DAY PRIOR SUPFACING.
PURPOSE
TO GIVE TIME ORGANIZE PROPER SURFACING AND DETERMINE SUITABILITY
AND WILLINGNESS MEET WITH PRESS, TV, ETC UNDER AEGIS ANSCROLL.
DEPENDING ON NATURE PRESS COVERAGE IN SAN FRANCISCO, PLAN HAVE
:
AMSCROLL SPONSOR SURFACING IN MANNER GIVE IMPRESSION IGLESIAS SUCCESS
PART OF OVERALL OPERATION DIRECTED AGAINST CUBAN MERCHANT MARINE.
WILL TIE IN WITH OTHER RECENT MARITIME DEFECTIONS AND WILL INDICATE
OTHERS TO FOLLOW.
NET-
HOD OF SURFACING WILL FOLLOW AMWASP-1 PATTERN.
2. FOR TORY.
ACTIVITY THIS Oº.
UNDER WHAT NANE?
E
PLEASE ADVISE IF REF OFFICERS AWARE OF ANSCROLL
DID THEY MEET ANFRAME-1 AND IF SO IN WHAT ROLE AND
ARE THEY AWARE OF THE AMSCROLL PAMPHLETS?
ALSO
REQUIST YOUR ESTIMATE THEIR WILLINGNESS COOPERATE IN PROP PLAY.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_31.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
SEPARATE COVER ATTACHMENT TO: EKAA-16273
MAILING LIST
Mr. Athanasion Kanellopoulos
Economikos Tachydromos
3 Christou Lada Street
Athane, Greece
2.
Mr. Haralambos Klaras
Editor, Vradyni
9-11 Piraeus Street
Athens, Greece
3,
Mr. Christoforos Bitsides
"Athens News Agency"
Athens, Greece
4.
Mr. Athanasios Paraschos
5.
8.
7.
8.
Ethnikos Kyrix
1 Christou Lada Street
Athens, Greeco
Mr. Leonidas Karapanayiotis
To Vima/Ta Nea
3 Christou Lada Street
Athens, Greece
Mr. Andreas Dimakos
To Vimn/Ta Nea
3 Christou Lada Street
Athens, Greece
Mr. Savvas Konstantopoulos
Eleftheros KosmOH
8 Pezmintzoglou Street
Athens, Greece
Mr. Kyros A. Kyrou
Estia
Athinou Gazi 7,
Athens, Greece
1
9.
Mr. Dimitrios Zannides
23 8isini
I
Athens, Greece
CS COPY
ste
OUT. I EKAA - 16273
19-120-26

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_311.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOTAL COPIESI
ORIGI
UNIT :
EXT 1'
"DATE:
☐ INDEX
SECRET
☐ FILE IN C3 PILE NO.
☐ NO INDEX
TO
FROM: DIRECTOR
PAGE 2
CONF:
.
INFO: VR FILE ☐ RID COPY
XXXXXXXXXXXXJSVYZVYKYSTFXXXXX
ROUTING
1
5
2
6
3
4
8
TO
PRESS CONFERENCE.
INFO
CITE DIR
6.4111
DUGGEST MIGHT BE DESIRABLE TO CITE MILITARY
CARGOS RATHER THAN ARMS PER SE. PER NISTERN-1 STATEMENT MADR 6593,
CARBIDE SHIPMENTS CLEARLY IN THIS CATEGORY, WOULD APPRECIATE TOKY
COMMENT.
3. FURTHER SUGGEST WAVE HAVE Q-42 AND OTHERS INDICATE THAT
GROWING SECURITY CONTROLS OVER CUBAN SHIPS MADE LIFE INTOLERABLE.
EXCEPT FOR PRESENCE OF TWO OR THREE-D8E MEN (HE MIGHT NAME A FEW)
ON EACH SHIP, UNDOUBTEDLY MANY MORE SZAKEN WOULD DEFECT. Q-42 COULD
FURTHER SUGGEST HE KNOWS OF AT LEAST ONE SECURITY TYPE (NOT NAMED) WHO
HIMSELF THINKING OF DEFECTING. ANOTHER FACTOR HINDERING MORE DEFECTION:
IS FEAR OF REPRISALS AGAINST FAMILIES,
END OF MESSAGE
"
T. Fly
" WILLIAM V. BROE
for
C/WH
RELEASING OFFICER
REPRODUci
FE/JKO
So. Diviso_phone
WII/C/CA/EW
WH/C/MO
COORDINATING OFFICERS
SECRET
510011
tacked from t
Soway my ond
-
EF
JOHN L. HART
DCWHD/C
I BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFIC
S PROHIBITED.
--1
1"
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
COPY NO.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_309.jpeg ---
14-00000
OROUP 1
INDEXY ☐ vis J.
Ovis %
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X NEW TO FILE NO,
FILE RID
☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
_ ASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
SON/UNIT NOTIFIE
TOTAL COPIES
19
P
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
FROM
ACTION
INFO
Torya
WA/08
☑ RID COPY
ADVANCE COPY
LAIT
☐ ☐
SLOTTED ☑ TOO
Ew
SA
-
TIME
MO
FL
RR
"21
05/20 0/25 $8
Sp
FILE, VR, CO/DO, FE8, CA2, CA/PROB, CA/04, CH/OPS, CIVICS, FI, FIN
CDC, SAKAR
SECRET 280710Z
PRIORITY WAVE DIR CITE TOKY 5955
TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF WAVE 2097 (1994)
200220SC
" BELIEVE REF SUGGESTION GIVE IMPRESSION ARACELIO IGLESIAS
(AI) CP PART OF OVER ALL OPERATION AGAINST CUBAN MERCHANT MARINE
WOULD BE COUNTERPRODUCTIVE VIEW GIST PSYCH PLAY HERE. WE ATTEMPTING
PUBLICIZE FACT AI CREW MEMBERS DEFECTED DIE OPPOSITION ORDERS CARRY
MATERIAL HORTH VIETNAM AND CUBAN EMBASSY TOKYO IS FAR EAST
COORDINATOR ALL SHIPMENTS WAR MATERIAL ON CUBAN VESSELS, THUS
ACTING TO IMPLEMENT CASTRO PROMISE AID NORTH VIETNAM WAR EFFORT,
BELIEVE ANY INDICATION THEY PREVIOUSLY IN TOUCH AMSCROLL OR OTHER
GROUP WOULD CAUSE DOUBTS VERACITY THEIR PRESS STATEMENT.. REQUEST
THEREFORE YOU NOT IMPLEMENT REF.
2°
SUBJECTS AWARE AMSCROLL ACTIVITY BUT HAVE NOT MET AMFRAME 1.
A MSCROLL PAMPHLETS NOT USED. BELIEVE SUBJECTS WILL COOPERATE FILLY
IN ANY TYPE PROP PLAY DESIRED. PLEASE ADHERE LINE TOKY 5949,
SECRET
CFN 5955 8397 ARACELIO IGLESIAS AI OP CUBAN AI NORTH VIETNAM CUBAN
FAR EAST CUBAN CASTRO NORTH AMSCROLL NOT IMPLEMENT AMSCROLL NOT MET
SECRET
"
..
4

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_312.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
INDERT ☐ YES ☐
☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REP TO FILE NO.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH
2
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
ROM
ACTION
TAFO
JMWAVE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFI
24
TOTAL COPIES
imsch
in
File
H/E'S B RID COPY
☑
ADVANCE COPY
☐ ☐ sure ☐ SE ☐ TUBED
OPTED
FILE 2 CA/CROTCH/IC 2 EEL SRP FEP
SECOFI 2317847
CITE LIYE out
TYPIC SPAN
HT
ACT
PEPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
IPP
• Mo
• CA
FI
☑
UNIT
IME
2320854
AP STORY FILED VIENNA AND PRINTED MIAMI HFPALD 23 DEC REPORTING
CZECH AD: ISSION OF DISASTROUS ECONOMIC ERPORS BEING USED BY
ANECROLL FADIC AT ONE MORE EXAMPLE INHERENT WEAKNESSES COMMUNIST
ECONOMIC THEORIES.
COMP IN INC WITH RECENT RUMANIAN AND SOVIET ADDISSO.5.
AS PART OF SASIC THEME TO AMSCROLL AUDIENCE THAT FUTURE CUBAN STONOMY
BLEAK INDEED IF AFTER ALL THESE YEARS SOVIETS, SATELLITES AND
CHINESE UNABLE SOLVE THESE PROBLEMS. IF AVAILABLE WILL APPRECIATE
PRECIS OF CZECH DOCUMENT.
SECREI
CFN
2T
PRECIS
3962 AP VIENNA MIANI HERALD 23 CZECH AMSCROLL PUMANIAN CHINE
SECRET
9321
Bowman
Howard Bounsin
Czech uparts. H
will call while
copy of newspaper
article on received
Seret under "F+/
66
7 Jan 6.
date: 1
The Smith
6158
:
ME

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_310.jpeg ---
14-00000
ORIG: D. Ronis/bh
UNIT : · DC/WH/C/CA
4148 (R-1464)
28 Dec 65
EXT :
DATE:
INDEX
☐ NO INDEX
8
FILE IN CS FILE NO.
MESSAGE FORM 36
TOTAL COPIESI
ROY ☐ RETURN TO BRANCH
FILE RID
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
ROUTING 110
SECRET
1
2
3
Eu
A
S
FL
7
JMWAVE TOKYO
TO :
FROM: DIRECTOR
CONFI
_ WH/C 8
INFOL VA FILE
☐ RID COPY
8
28 DEC 65 19 002
DEC65
19-132-49/3
SIG CEIL
D
FE & CI, 11/08S, F1 F1/04,
CDC CA/24, CAZ, CA/FEEF, SAVA Z
C,
INFO TOKY
CITE DIR
FL Fi/D
N
TO
PRITY WAVE
TYPIC ZRWAGON
REFS: A.
68111
1.
WAVE 8097 (IN 21994)
B. TOKY 5955 (IN 22090)
HQ'S CONCURS TOKY REQUEST THAT IGLESIAS DEFECTIONS CONTINUE
APPEAR SPONTANEOUS AND WAVE NOT GIVE IMPRESSION DEFECTIONS PART OF
OVERALL EXILE ORGANIZATION OP AGAINST MERCHANT MARINE. SINCE AMSCROLL
(WIDELY KNOWN) ASSOCIATION WITH MHVIPER ACTIVITIES, SUGGEST WAVE
RECONSIDER USE AMSCROLL. AMICE MIGHT BE MORE SUITABLE GROUP TO
SPONSOR WAVE SURFACING. SINCE WE NOW HAVE AT LEAST SEVEN RECENT
MARITIME DEFECTORS, PULLING ALL TOGETHER IN NEAR FUTURE FOR FURTHER
PSYCH ‘ACTIONS WHEN CURRENT PSYCH EXPLOITATIONS COMPLETED MIGHT BE
MORE EFFECTIVELY ACCOMPLISHED UNDER AEGIS AMICE. ALL SURFACINGS SHOULD
CONVEY IMPRESSION WIDESPREAD DISSATISFACTION IN MERCHANT MARINE.
2.
ODACID EXPRESSING SOME CONCERN OVER DEFECTORS' STATEMENTS
RE "ARMS" SHIPMENTS TO NORTH VIETNAM AND DESIRES ASSURANCE STATEMENTS
CAN BE SUPPORTED AT LEAST BY LOGICAL ASSUMPTIONS, IF NOT OUTRIGHT FACT,
OTHERWISE FEAR ENTIRE EFFORT, WHICH THEY FEEL IS MOST DESIRABLE, MAY
BE COUNTERPRODUCTIVE. WAVE SHOULD REVIEW STATEMENTS CAREFULLY WITH
SUBJECTS. AND BE CERTAIN THEY CONSISTENT AND CONVINCING SINCE IT
ANTICIPATED THIS WILL BE SUBJECT TO SEARCHING QUESTIONS IN FORTHCOMING
COORDINATING OFFICERS
GROUP I
Eached from automatic
Somegrading and
en lassen at an
RELEASING OFFICER
28-3
SECRET
T.ON BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
COPY NO.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_313.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
=
☐ ves
INDEX: ☐ YES ☐ no
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. 1
X-REF TO FILE NO,
19-120-
FILE RID ☐ RET, TO BRANCH
DESTROY ☑ SIO.
FROM
9
ACTION
TAFO
JMWAVE
WH/CE
1880n
MESSAGE
23/30 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
GROUP
ADVANCE COPY
✓ RID COPY
☑
☐
FILE, VR, EEG, WES, CAZ, CA/PROP
sti
REPRODUCTION PROMI.
TIME
SECRET 232153Z
PRIORITY ATHE INFO DIR MADR CITE WAVE 8075
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
PEF: A. ATHE 8031
1.
B. WAVE 7921
(I/17/31)
TN 16238)
23210IC
A
MEETING WITH ECONOMIDES DID NOT RESULT ANY QUOTABLE MATERIAL.
WHILE MEETING NOT EXPLICITLY STIPULATED CONFIDENTIAL IT WAS PRIVATE
IN NATURE AND PURPOSE WAS TO RECEIVE "CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS" FOR
:
$
!
i
t
!
19-120-26
23 Dec 65
1
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_314.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
1
fA
IN21010
PAGE 2 of 2
ASSAGE TSIRIMOKOS. THUS WE RELUCTANT RELEASE FULL ACCOUNT AND
THEREBY NEGATE WHAT AP
2.
APREADS
PRENOSIS
LAY 'SE
PROMISING CONTACT.
STUD
HOWEVER ANSCROLL WILL RELEASE AN ACCOUNT 24 DEC SAYING
HOWEVER ANSCROLL W
AMSCROLL HAS PRESENTED ITS SHIPPING AND GALBE CASES TO
GREEK DIPLOMATS WHO MEMBERS TSIRIMOKOS UN ENTOURAGE. WILL REPORT
DIPLOMATS STATEMENT GREEK GOVT IS AWARE SHIPPING PROBLEM BUT BELIEVES
THIS WILL DECLINE AND DISAPPEAR IN FUTURE. RI GALBE, WILL SAY
DIPLOMATS ACKNOWLEDGED GALBE BEHAVIOR AND STATED THIS A MATTER BEING
CAREFULLY EXAMINED BY GREEK GOVT. THIS RELEASE WILL BE SEPARATE FROM
THAT DESCRIBED PARA 7 REF B AND WILL BE A IR MAILED ADDRESSES PROVIDET.
BY ATHE.
3. FOR DIR AND MADE. RE PARA S REF B, RECHECK INDICATES
ALABART WAS SPEAKING OF MINISTER OF INDUSTRIES LOPEZ BRAVO RATHER
THAN COMMERCE MINISTER DEL BRAVO IN THIS CONTEXT.
SECRET
CFN: 8075 8031 7921 ECONOMIDES NOT RESULT NOT EXPLICITLY TSIRIMOKOS
AM SCROLL 24 DEC GALRE GREEK A 7 B 6 B ALABART LOPEZ BRAVO DEL BRAVO
BT
NNNN
7
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_315.jpeg ---
14-00000
19
::
:
INDERI ■ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET, TO BRANCH
DESTROY ☐ ,
FROM
$10.
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
GROUP
O
STION
19-13249/5
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP-
UNIT
CA
FI
TIME
◉MO
D
ACTION
INFO
MWAVE
ADVANCE COPY
☐ RID COPY
☐ ... SSUED ☐ SLOTTED ☐
TUBED
(WHIC D
FILE JR, WET, EEG, CAZ, CA/PRIP, 11/162
SECRET 101613Z
ACTIONA
ATHE INFO MADR DIR CITE WAVE 781
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF A.
ATHE 7960
B.
WAVE 7793
(IN 1061st
(IN10801)
*
to se
RE PARA 5 REF A AMSCROLL WILL WRITE LETTER SUGGESTED PARA 4
R
UPON RECEIPT CLIPS. DE PARA 6: SEE REF B.
SECRET
CFN 7819 7960 7793 RE 5 A AMSCROLL 4 CLIPS RE 6 B
BT
SECRET
* LETTER AIRMAILED
8 DEC

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_32.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
.
10.
Mr. Ioannis Vellidis
Makodonia
3 -
Thessaloniki, Greoce
11.
Mr. Solon Grigoriadis
Akropolis
12.
13.
14.
15.
12 Feldlou Street
Athens, Groece
Naftilia Noa
Athens, Greece
Naftiki Hellng
Athens, Greece
Naftemboriki
Athens, Greece
Naftiliaki Naftergatiki
13 Chalkokondyli Street
Athens, Greece
i
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_318.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1
1
65
IN 17131 PAGE 2
SECRET
B CLARING GALBE AS PERSONA NON GRATA.
4. NO INDEX.
JAN VAN IT 72666
17
i
SECRET
CFN
8031 8021 7921 6 NOT INDICATE MARKOS ECONOMIDES 2 B
ECONOMIDES NOT B A ONE 7 3 AMSCROLL GOG TSIRIMOKOS' UN GALBE
_ AMSCROLL GOG GREEK CUBA TSIRIMOKOS TSIRIMIKOS GOG GALBE A
PEG GOG GALDE PERSONA NON GRATA NO INDEX
BT
+
SECRET
1
i
!
1
;
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_317.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
INDERT ☐ YES
ɖo
NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. 14-120LASSIFIED MESSAGE
X-REP TO FILE NO. _
PILE RID ☐ BET, TO BRANCH ☑
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
Malvain
26
SECRET
SON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ATHENS
ACTION
WH/C8
INFO
30
PACE
TOTAL COPIES
ПROUP 1
pre
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
TIME
☑ RID COPY
☐ ☐
ISSUE
.
☐ TUDED
FILE VR, EEG, WEB, CAZ, CA/PROP, DOY, DolH3,
SECRET 171551Z
PRIORITY WAVE INFO DIR MADR CITE ATHE 3931 (BACHMAN ACTING)
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF:
1.
A. ATHE 3221 Q216297*
B. WAVE 7921 QN16238)
* PLS ADVISE OUTCOME WAVE 1852.
(IN 12973),
17 DEC 65 IN 17131
REF B DOES NOT INDICATE WHETHER MARKOS ECONOMIDES
DISCUSSED PARA 2 REF B SUBJECTS IN QUOTABLE, OFF-
THE-CUFF, OR EXFICIAL STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL MANNER.
2. IF CONOMIDES DID NOT STIPULATE REF B DISCUSSION ATTRACT
"CONFIDENTIAL" ONE, THEN SUGGEST PARA 7 REF B AMSCROLL PRESS
RELEASE ALSO INCLUDE STATEMENT FROM "OFFICIAL GREEK
GOVT (GOG) REPRESENTATIVE OF TSIRIMOKOS' UN ENTOURAGE INDICATED
HIS DISAPPROVAL OF GALDE AND LISTENED SYMPATHETICALLY TO AMSCROLL
ALSO, GOG OPPOSED TO GREEK SHIPPING TO CUBA.
PRESENTATION".
3. WE HAVE CONSIDERED POSSIBILITY TSIRIMOKOS REACTION TO
ABOVE.
ALTHO TSIRIMIKOS MAY DENY PERSON IN HIS EN-
TOURAGE MADE STATEMENT IT UNLIKELY HE WILL DENY GOG DISAPPROVAL
OF GALBE CONDUCT. FURTHERMORE, IN EVENT A DENIAL IS ACTUALLY
ISSUED, THIS WOULD SERVE AS USEFUL PEG KEEP STORY ALIVE AND
ALLOW FURTHER EDITORIAL CRITICISM OF GOG INACTION IN
SECRET
19-120-26
CA/E/CS
17 Dece

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_316.jpeg ---
14-00000
MESSAGE FORM
TOTAL COPIES:
DRIG: S. CHACONAS/nea
UNIT: WH/C/CA/PP
Er: 5518/9138
DATE: 17 DEC 65
☐ INDEX
✓ NO INDEX
6
☐ FILE IN CS FILE NO.
TO JMWAVE MADRID ATHENS
FROM: DIRECTOR
CONF:
S-E-C-R-E-T
Tuklas
INFO: VR, FILE ☐ RID COPY
WAVE
INFO MADR ATHE
XXXX
TURTO BRANCH ☐ FILE RID
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
36
ROUTING
Re
ER-
S
EL
2
3
6
IC
7
EXPDEC 05 15 PZ
19-120-56/13
SIG CEN
1, EEG, WER, CA 2, CA/PROP, Cilic 2,
Do 4, DOIH3
CITE DIR
66092
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF: WAVE 7921 (IN 16238)*
1. CONCUR PROP PROPOSAL PARAS 6 AND 7 REF. CONSIDER ALABART
RESPONSE HIGHLY REVEALING AND UNDERSCORES PROPOSAL GIVE SPANISH/CUBAN
TRADE THEME WIDEST AND CONTINUING PLAY L.A. PRESS AND RADIO AND ALSO
EUROPEAN AREA. SUGGEST AMHIM CABLE SUMMARY AMSCROLL PRESS RELEASE PER
PARA 7 REF TO SEVERAL OF ITS MORE RESPONSIVE OUTLETS INCLUDING ATHE,
ORDER ASSURE FULLEST COVERAGE..
IN
2. FOR MADR: REQUEST STATION CABLE HQS WAVE ANY GOS REACTION
RESULT PROP PLAY ABOVE ALSO ANY STATION SUGGESTIONS FOR AMSCROLL use in
PREPARATION PRESS RELEASE AND PAPER TO BE FORWARDED DEL BARRIO
END OF MESSAGE
* Concerns interview with Spanish Consul-General in N.Y.
DC/WH/C/CA
11. R
WH/C/MO
WE/C Les Raty (Phone)
WE/5
Les Raty (Phone)
WILLIAM V. BROK
C/WH
EE/K
Bob Stevens
COORDINATING OFFICERS
Alre
Wow
JOHN L. HART
DCWHD/C
RELEASING OFFICER
17-5
S-E-C-R-E-T
GROUP 1
Earluded from
downgrading and
decofic
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
!
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
COPY NO.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_319.jpeg ---
14-00000
TOTAL COPIES
GP
INDERT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID☐ RET, TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
IMWIA
ACTION
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP-
• CA-EW
☐ RID COPY ☐ ☐ ☐ TUSED
FILL FR, MIDP, 5/18 1/66/01
5/21
MO
UNIT
RR
7 0505
2
TIME
SECRET 171819Z
ACTIONN
PRIORITY TOKY INFO DIR CARA CITE WAVE 7938
RYBAT TYPIC ZRWAGON
RF WAVE 7892 (IN 14727) +
AMFRAME-
VENEZUELAN DOCUMENTATION COMPLETED.
1
TOKY ALITALIA 772 AT 2240 ON 19 BEC TOKYO TIME.
17 DEC 65 IN 17112
ARRIVING
:
:
T
.. Ali FiCOKED ALITALIA FLT 7:72, DERMÉ TIA:.
CAESL 19 THE ARRIVE TOKIO 2200/14 DEC.
SECRET
VFN: 7938 7892 AMFRAME-1 VENEZUELAN ALITALIA 772 2240 19
BT
SECRET
i
:
:
i
1
i
:
BY

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_320.jpeg ---
14-00000
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
Jower's
ACTION
(1/11/8/8
FILE
VR,
SIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
+91
ON/UNIT NOTIF
COPIES
TOTAL COF ITS
PIAU
ADVANCE COPY
COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ☐
74-120-26
REPRODUCTION PROMISTED
PP
Th
12
FL
IS
TIME
D
EE 6, WE. 2, CAZ., CA/EES, CA/AROP, 02/04, 05/005 07/282, 1, 1x/200
Day, Del11-3
SECRET 1618282
DIR INFO ATHE MADR CITE WAVE 7921
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF
WAVE 7852 (N 12973)
R
16 DEC 65. 16238
1. EF DELEGATION UNABLE SEE TSIRIMOKOS DUE PRESS UN BUSINESS.
HOWEVER RECEIVED FOR HOUR AND HALF 12 DEC BY MARKOS ECON OMIDES
WHO DESCRIBED SELF AS CREEK DIPLOMAT WHO AIDE TO AND TRAVELING
WITH TSIPIMOKOS.
2,
DELEGATION RAISED IWO SUBJECTS;
A.
GALBE
B. GREEK SHIPPING TO CUBA
3. RE 2A ECONOMIDES INDICATED HIS DISAPPROVAL OF GALBE AND..
LISTENED SYMPATHETICALLY TO AMSCROLL ARGUMENTS. MADE NO PROMISES
PUT SAID WOULD GIVE AMSCROLL PREPARED PRESENTATION OF CASE TO
ISIPINOKOS. (THIS INCLUDED LATEST AMSCROLL LETTER DESCRIBED
WAVE 7793.) ECONOMIDES DID NOT INDICATE ANY ACTION BEING TAKEN
TO P.N.G. GALBE.
4.
RE > SAID HE AND GREEK GOVT WELL AWARE PROBLEM AND OPPOSED
EXPLAINED CONTINUATION DUE GREEK SHIP OWNERS
TO THIS SHIPPING
SECRET
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_322.jpeg ---
14-00000
::
SECRET
i
OF CONTINENT. IN CONCLUSION ASKED FOR AMSCR
IN CONCLUSION ASKED FOR AMSCROLL STUDY THIS MATTER
SCROLL STUDY THIS MATTER
PLUS INFO ON SHIPPING BOYCOTT AND COPIES ILA RESOLUTIONS IN
ORDER FORWARD THEM TO DEL BARRIO. IDEN C OF REF NOW GATHERING
MATERIAL TO COMPLY WITH REQUEST.
7. WAVE SUGGESTS AMSCROLL PREPARE PRESS RELEASE ON STUDY OF
SPAIN/CUBA TRADE AND ITS POTENTIALLY ADVERSE EFFECT ON SPAINISH
HOPES FOR REST OF LA. COULD ARRANGE PICKUP BY AMHIM AND POSSIBLY
WIPE SERVICES FOR SUBSEQUENT REPLAY BY OTHER STATIONS. PURPOSE
TO NEEDLE SPAIN TO DISCOURAGE ITS TRADE WITH CUBA. REQUEST DIR,
MADR COMMENTS.
SECRET
CFN 7921 7852 TSIRIMOKOS 12 MARKOS ECONOMIDES GALBE 2A EMSCROLL
NO PROMISES 7993 NOT INDICATE PNG 2B 2 AMWORD-3 MANUEL ALABART
AMBLEAK-, ILA LOPEZ DEL BARRIO ILA C LA AMHIM
BT
SECRET
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_325.jpeg ---
14-00000
SANET
IN 14727, Pageant
7892 7843 NOT SENT AMFRAME-1 ALITALIA 772 CARACAS 18 TOKY 2200 19
JAPANESE AMFRAME-1 AMSCROLL AMWASP-1 JAPAN/CUBA OPS OSCAR C/O
AMSCROLL I.A. OP YOPOLL/41 -1 OP VENEZUELAN –
BT
CFN
2
SECNET
!
#

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_321.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
WEALTHY AND POWERFUL.
SECRET
EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR AND COMMENTED
ON THOROUGHNESS OF AMSCROLL FILE THIS SUBJECT PREPARED FOR TSIRIMOKOS
AND LEFT WITH ECONOMIDES.
5. IN CONCLUSION ECONOMIDES SAID HE MOST SYMPATHETIC WITH AIMS
AMSCHOLL AND ADDED THAT PREVIOUS LETTERS TO TSIR IMOKOS ON GALBE
HAD PEEN HELPFUL. URGED THAT AMSCROLL KEEP HIM AND TSIRIMOKOS
INFORMED FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS PARA 2 SUBJECTS. WILL POUCH AMWORD-3
REPORT THIS MEETING WHEN PREPARED.
1
6. FOR MADR. WHILE IN NEW YORK AMSCROLL DELEGATION CALLED UPON
SPANISH CONSUL-GENERAL MANUEL ALABART (WHO RELATED TO AMBLEAK-1)
SEEKING ENTREE TO TSIRIMOKOS. CONVERSATION LED TO SHIPS BEING BUILT
IN SPAIN FOR CUBA. POINT WAS MADE TO ALABART THIS ACTIVITY COULD
BACKFIRE ON SPAIN PARTICULARLY IN VIEW RECENT INTERNATIONAL LONG-
SHOREMEN ASSOC (ILA) RESOLUTION TO BOYCOTT FREE WORLD SHIPS THAT
TRADE WITH CUBA. ALABART RESPONDED THIS SUBJECT OF GREAT INTEREST
TO SPANISH MINISTER COMMERCE LOPEZ DEL BARRIO ESPECIALLY IF TRADE
WITH CUBA WOULD REFLECT UNFAVORABLY UPON SPAIN'S ANNOUNCED ECONOMIC
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR BALANCE LATIN AMERICA. SAID DEL BARRIO
HAD LEFT NEW YORK FOR MADRID TWO DAYS PREVIOUSLY AND HAD DISCUSSED
WITH ALABARI PROBLEM OF CUBAN TRADE AS IT RELATES TO PLANS FOR REST
SECRET
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_323.jpeg ---
*
14-00000
INDER. ☐ S. ☐ no
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-DF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID
10 ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ACTION
AINENS
SWHICH
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
28/2 SECRET
[PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
PI
38
19-120-76
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP=
CA
C
MO
☑
EL
x
ADVANCE COPY
TIME
✓ RID COPY
☐ ...
ISSUED ☐ SEOPTED
☐ ye ☐ ee
..
INFO
FILE, VR, WEE, EEG, D04, Do/H3, CAZ, CAlprop, cılız
SEC
ECRET 1615CØZ
WAVE MADR INFO DIR CITE ATHE 8018, (BACHMAN ACTING).
THUNIFORM
REF A. WAVE 7819 (N12365)
P. ATHE 6219, 28 MAY 65
ACTION
ARTICLE
1. ATHE AFTERNOON PAPER VRADYNI IN FRONT-PAGE ART DEC 65 IN 16143
15 DEC HEADLINED AMSCROLL REF A REQUEST TO FONMIN TSIR IMOKOS FOR
DEPORTATION GALBE. PRINTED GIST AMSCROLL LETTER.
2. THUPRISE/12 (1/12) WILL NOW APPROACH ISIRIMOKOS UPON
LAITER'S RETURN FROM U.S. AND CALL ATTENTION TO T/12'S 27 MAY
INTEPPELLATION IN PARLIAMENT PER REF B. T/12 WILL ASK WHAT
ACTION TSIRIMOKOS INTENDS TAKE. IF ISIRIMOKOS ANSWER UNSATIS-
FACTORY, T/12 WILL ADVISE HIM OF INTENT RE-RAISE ISSUE FROM
FLOOR PARLIAMENT. WILL KEEP ADDEES ADVISED OF T/12 PROGRESS.
3. AIRMAILING CLIPS AND TRANSLATION TO WAVE AND HQS.
4. NO INDEX.
SECRET
CFN
.: 8018 7819 6219 28 65 VRADYNI 15 DEC REF A TSIRIMOKOS GALBE
THUPRISE/12 (7/12) UST/12'S 27 NAY T/12 T/12 T/12 HQS NO INDEX
SECRET
I
!
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_326.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
r
I
*
".
38
INDER: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO-FILE NOT
FILE RID
28
☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ 916.
31
FROM
JMWAVE
ACTION
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT. NOTIFIE
TOTAL COP IF
U'
-4
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
TUMO
EW.
FLTC
• CICS
INFO
DETUNICS
ADVANCE COPY
RID COPY
FESUED ☐ SLOTTED ☐
TUDE
UNIT
TIME 120°
Fite, VR, ADPP, CLEES, C/WHL C/PG, C/CI, C/FIL, C/FI/D4, CDC
✓
SECRET 142340Z
TOKY INFO DIR CARA CITE WAVE 7893
RYBAT TYPIC ZRWAGON
92 (IN 4727)
REF WAVE 7292
IDEN: RAFAEL RIVAS VAZQUEZ
SECRET
CFN 7893 7892 RAFAEL RIVAS VAZQUEZ
BT
SECT
N
NNN
I
SC
146 14707
I
F
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_324.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDEX: ☐ YES ☐ no
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REP TO FILE NO.
FILE RID
☐ NET. TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROV ☐ SIG.
31
FROM
ACTION
N. WAVE
INFO
WHICS
SIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE
☑ RID COPY ☐
1
TOTAL COPIES
AG
FILE, UR, ADDP. CIFE6, C/WH6, C/PG
14-12-0-26
REPRODUCTION PROMIBITED
TPP
> CH
☐ SLOTTER ☐ TUBER
UNIT
BEZCH
2/C1, C/FIZ, C/F1/04, CDC
SECPE I 142340Z
TOKY INFO DIR CARA CITE WAVE 7892
RYBAT TYPIC ZPWAGON
REF WAVE 7843 (NOT SENT CAPA)
1.
(IN12663)"
155 14727
EK
* Ami-) DEPARTING FK
CHITNEY 11016
AMFRAME-1 (IDEN) BOOKED ALITALIA FLIGHT 772 DEPARTING CAPACAS-
18 DEC TO ARRIVE TOKY 2200 ON 19 DEC. DELAY DUE JAPANESE EMBASSY
REFUSAL ACCEPT PRESENT DOCUMENTATION THUS NECESSITATING HIS OBTA IN ING
VENEZUELAN PASSPORT.
CHIEF
2. AMFRAME-1 IS CHI EF ECONOMIC WARFARE SECTION AMSCROLL AND HAS
COLLABORATED WITH STATION AND AMWASP-1 ON JAPAN/CUBA TRADE OPS. HE
PREPARED DISCUSS WITH OSCAR OR OTHER C/O HOW AMSCROLL MIGHT BETTER
SUPPORT EFFORT REDUCE THIS TRADE.
13%
27
.
30
OF
OP. DIR: WAVE WILL I.A. CHARGES THIS OP TO YOPOLL/41.
4.
FOR CARA: AMFRAME-1 ENROUTE TOKY ON SENSITIVE OP. ORIGINATING
TRIP CARACAS TO HIDE WAVE APEA ORIGIN. AS NOTED ABOVE IT NECESSARY
FOR HIM OBTAIN VENEZUELAN DOCUMENTATION WHICH HE ARRANGING THROUGH
FATHER AND UNCLE WHO VENEZUELAN CITIZENS AND SENIOR GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS.
SECRET
SPORET
7
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_327.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
"
INDEKS ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE M.
X-REF TO FÌLE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
$
ACTION
Jawake
1/08
r
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
22
SECRET
PERSON/NIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
36
1
-
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ☐
TUBED
1-120-16/3
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP
SA
TIME.
INFO
FILE, VA EGG WES CAR CA/04/w/ics is us/exis wific
SECRET 111831Z
DIR INFO ATHE MADR CITE WAVE 7853
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF:
WAVE
7852 (IN/2973)
11 Dec 65 IN 12980
IDEN A. DR. MARIO SEIGLIE MONTORO, UR SECRETARY GENERAL.
IDEN B. DR. FERNANDO FERNANDEZ CAVADA, IR SECRETARY FOR
FOREIGN AFFAIRS.
IDEN C. DR. JOSE R ALVAREZ DIAZ, RECOGNIZED ECONOMIST,
FORMER CUBAN CABINET MINISTER (OF HACIENDA).
SECRET
CFN 7853 7852 A DR MARIO SEIGLIE MONTORO UR B DR FERNANDO FERNANDEZ
CAVADA UR DR JOSE R ALVAREZ DIAZ HACIENDA
BT
:
L
NNN
SECRET
1
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_328.jpeg ---
14-00000
++
✓
TED ☑ NO
INDEX ☐ TEE
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. 14-16 / CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
X-REP TO FILE NO.
FILE HID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☑
DESTROY ☐ SI
FROM
☐ SIG. 229
2.
TOTAL COPIES 48
SECRET
h
PERSON UNIT NOTIFIED
IMWAVE
WH/C/APP
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
ACTION
WH/CE
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ... ☐ SE ☐ T
UNIT
TIME
FILE, VR, FER WHT, WEB CAZ CA/PROF C1/163 214, 20/03
SECPE T 112885Z
DIR INFO TOKY MADR CARA CITE WAVE 7859
TYPIC MHSPAWN
WAVE 7625 (IN 07753
QN05886
REF:
A.
•
B. WAVE 7631 NOT SENT TOKY>
11 DEC 65 IN 12999
AN
K
111/8/85
ABSTRACT ✗
☑
1. HEADLINE STORY 11 DEC DIARIO LAS AMERICAS FEATURED FRONT
PAGE WAVE-INSPIRED AFP ARTICLE STATING JAPAN AND SPAIN TO BE
PRINCIPAL TARGETS OF CONTINENT-WIDE BOYCOTT. ARTICLE REFERS TO
BOYCOTT AGREEMENT BY PORTWORKERS OF US, CANADA AND PUERTO RICO AND
TO EXPECTED INCREASE IN EFFECTIVENESS DUE TO ILA AND GLEASON
SUPPORT.
2 IN ARTICLE, SPAIN CHARACTERIZED AS ONE OF MAJOR
SUPPLIERS AND JAPAN AS PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF CUPAN FUNDS WHICH
USED TO PROMOTE HEMISPHERIC SUBVERSION. FIGURES PE JAPAN/CUBAN
TRADE PROVIDED BY UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UE). ARTICLE ALSO
PROMINENTLY MENTIONS CORREA AND FORDC.
3. AIRMAILING CLIPS TO ADDEES.
SECRET
19-126-3.5/3
11 Dich
CFN 7859 7625 7631 NOT SENT 11 DIARIO LAS AMEPICAS AFF US CANADA
¡SECRET!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_33.jpeg ---
14-00000
ENDSE. ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE PID
19-12-26 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
☐ RET. TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
45
TOTAL COPIES
19
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
"
ACTION
414/006 8
INFO
8
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
TIME
☑ RID COPY
☐ ☐ ☐ Tee
FILE, VR, WH &
SA60
SLCRET 121568Z CITE SANTIAGO 4/66 (THILLEN ACTING)
J.WAVE INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC AMSCROLL
REF:
MSCRULY (10) 644.3:2)
JMWAVE 7103, 10 MAY
12 Jun 07 # 87640
SPANISH TRANSLATION REF STUDY, NEVER RECEIVED SANTIACS.
PLS POUCH ANOTHER SET.
SECRET
BT
SECRET
ANig
R3
FI
DEST
ABSTRACT ✗S
19-120-26
12. June 67
1
1
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_329.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
INDEX: ☐ Yes ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET, TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ DIG,
FROM
ACTION
TOKYO
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
43
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES 2
19
->
1200
26
STI
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
☐ PP
☑cres
CA
FITC
D
TIME
INFO
oc/wyk 5
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐. ☐ SLOTTED ☐ FU
FILE VR, ANDP, CLEES, C/C1, C/F12, C/F1/04, CDC
UNIT
S
ECRET 102921Z
PRIORITY WAVE INFO DIR CITE TOKY 5725
RYBAT TYPIC ZRWAGON
10 DEC 65 IN 11951
REF:
DIR 63721 y
1. PLEASE HAVE AMFRAME ONE COME TOKY TO ARRIVE 15 DECEMBER.
PLEASE
ADVISE AIRLINE AND FLIGHT. ASK AIRLINE RESERVE ROOM TOKYO HILTON HOTEL.
HE WILL BE CONTACTED AT AIRPORT BY PERSON USING NAME OSCAR.
7
2.
IF AIRPORT CONTACT ABORTS AMFRAME ONE SHOULD GO TO LOBBY OF
TOKYO HILTON HOTEL AT 10 AM OR 10 PM WHERE HE WILL BE CONTACTED BY
OSCAR.
3. PLEASE CABLE DESCRIPTION AMFRAME ONE.
40 ABOVE CONTACT INSTRUCTIONS REPLACE OSAKA CONTACT CITED TOKY
5684.
SECRET
:
CFN: 5 725 63724 15 OSCAR 10 AM 10 PH OSAKA 5684
BT
> H&S CONCURRED, USING
DEFECTION OPS
SECRET
AMFRAME-1 TO
ASSIST IN
1
i
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_331.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
IN 11828 PAGE 2
STATEMENT
HIS PERSONAL WIT AND SARCASM, MAY MAKE RELEASA 13
SIMILAR TO PARA 1 REF A. FYI: TSIRIMOKOS
SCHEDULED DEPART US O/A 12 DEC. PLS ADVISE IF
ACTION TAKEN.
3. NO INDEX.
SECRET
CFN 7970 7662 7793 7960 B C RE 4 C PSYCH AMSCROLL KUBARK NEW YORY
ILTAS TEIRIMOKOS NY UN CYPRUS SA REF C GALBE GALBE'S GREECE
CUDA-GREEK ETC TSIRIMOKOS UN COMMIE CYPRUS MHSPAWN TSIRIMOKOS
IREF A FYI TSIRIMOKOS US O/A 12 DEC ADVISE NO INDEX
BT
ATHE 7662 (IN 85125) uy
:
=
4 LETTERS
MENTIONE PARA 2
PARA 2 ATHE
AIRMAILED 8 DEC.
SECRET
NNNN
VV RYBAT
}
(

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_330.jpeg ---
14-00000
JEXI
☐ ☐
LASSIFY TO FILE AS.
<REF TO FILE NO,
FILE RID☐ RET, 16 same □
DESTROY ☐ SIG,
CLASSIFI MESSAGE
4
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
GRM P
37
;-127-2-6
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
☑O
FROM
ACTION
INFO
WTHENS
WHICH
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
FL-TS
TIME
☐ ☐ ☑ . C5/00 1127)
ISSUE NOTTED
TUBED
P
x
01531
A
FILE VR, CS/20, WE 8, FE. 6 CA2, CA/PROP, 204, 20/143; C1/162
SECRE 1 2914537
PRIORITY DIR YAVE INFO MADR CITE AT 7370
TYPIC NHSPA TIFORM
REFS: A. 6182 716
2
B.
(~88125)
(~ 10801) >
C. AT 720 (~10615)
1. RERS AND CROSSED INTRANSMISSION.
2
INFRANSI
RE PAPA & REF C, DELIEVE IT MAY BE HIGHLY
OLD
--
TOYCH STANDPOINT 10 HAVE WAVE SEND
DELEGATION FROM AMSCROLL OR OTHER SUITABLE KUBARK
GUIDED GROUP, POSSIBLY FROM NEW YORK, TO SEE DEPUTY
PRIME MINISTER AND FOREIGN MINISTER ILIAS TSIRIMOKOS
WHO NOW IS KY FOP UN CYPRUS DEBATE. GROUP CAN USE PARA SA
REF C ARGUMENT 4 OTHERS AGAINST GALDE TO DEMAND GALBE'S
EXPULSION FROM BALECE, BREAKING CUBA-BREEK DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS, ETC. ALTHO WE MIGHLY DOUBT TSIRINOKOS WILL
ACCEPT THEIR GEMANDS AT THIS TIME BECAUSE HIS FEAR OF
ALIENATIVE US COKYLE VOTE ON CYPRUS ISSUES, WE CAN EXPLOIT
ISSUE THRU KMSPAWN ASSETS.
ALSQ
11 TRIPLKOVOS, KNOWN FOR
SECRED
_:
14

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_332.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDER: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID □ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
-FROM
JMWAVE
ACTION
INFO
Do/WH/C/5
26
OBUP
D
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐.
☐ ISSUED ☐ SLOTTED
☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUBED
FILE ke, ADDP, c/FE 8, 2/91 C/F12, C/F1/04, CDC
19-170x4
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
• Ff.
•TC
7\MO
☐ PE
•CA
4 EW
D
UNIT
TIME
BY
SECRET, 92330Z
PRIORITY TOKY INFO ROUTINE DIR CITE WAVE 7843
Não
NO NIGHT ACTION
RYMAI TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF: TOKY 5725(IN 11951)*
"
AU
10 DEC 65 IN 12663
AMFRAME-1 DEPARTING FOR CARACAS 11 DEC.
BRIEFED PER
REF. WILL CABLE ETA WHEN CONFIRMED.
20
COMPLEXION FAIR.
PER PARA 3 REF AMFRAME-1 APPROX FIVE FEET EIGHT AND HEAVY SET.
THOUGH FLUENT IN ENGLISH, ACCENT DISCERNABLE. AT
AIRPORT WILL BE CARRYING UNDER ARM CURRENT ISSUE NEW YORKER OR READING
SAME IF CONTACT ATTEMPTED IN HOTEL LOBBY.
SECRET
CFN 7843 5725 CAFACAS 11 DEC ETA 3 AMERAME-1 ENGLISH NEW YORKER
RT
* REQUESTED AMFRAME/1 COME TO KY IS DEC,
: :
SECRET
:
1
I
:
[

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_333.jpeg ---
14-00000
L
INDEX:
YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
48
FILE RIDŰPÉRT, TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
CLASSI.. MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES.
3%
120.
26
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
FROM
ACTION
INFO
Toxyo
WATC
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ISSUED ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUDED
TC-
R
FL
MO
CA
EW
UNIT
TIME
BY D
✓
FILE, VR, FEB, WH 8, C.₁loA, Cilops, C1/1C2, CA2, CA/04
SECRET 080909Z
PRIORITY WAVE INFO DIR CIT) OKY 5634
TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF:
WAVE 7755
ACTION
(M094-26)
8 DE 6510 08
1. HOTEL RESERVATION WILL BE MADE FOR AMFRAME/1 AT
OSAKA ROYAL HOTEL, OSAKA, JAPAN. AMFRAME/1 WILL BE CONTACTED
AT HOTEL AFTER ARRIVAL BY PERSON USING NAME OSCAR.
2° ADVISE AMFRAME 1'S ETA OSAKA,
SECRET
CFN: 5684 7755 AMFRAME/1 OSAKA OSCAR 1'S ETA
BT
NNNN
SECRET
i
Requested contact instruction plu
Hotel by Return cable in order,
Pass AMFRAME-1 PRIOR departure fo
caracas.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_334.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDER: ☐ YES ☐ NO.
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID☐ RET. TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ACTION
INFO
7 WAKE
1811/181
FILE VR
CA/04
CLASSIFILU MESSAGE
51
SECRET
•
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES-
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY ☐
☐
CROUP I
D
☐ ☐
SLOTTED ☐ JURED
9-1.20-26
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TC-
FI
70
ICA
EN
RR
TIME
BCI
FE8, W118 01/04, 01/085 01/152,00z
SECRET 0800477
PRIORITY TOKY INFO DIR CITE WAVE 7755
NO NIGHT ACTION
TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF: A.
TGKY 5653 (IN 090901
B.
WAVE 7714
1.
508803)
t
AMFRAME I IS AMSCROLL (DEN) OFFICIAL IN CHARGE THEIR
ECONOMIC WARFARE PROGRAM. MEETS REF A REQUIREMENTS.
SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY VISA AMFRAME-1 WILL BE PREPARED
DEPART FOP JAPAN 13 DEC OP OTHER DATE AS DESIRED BY TOKY. IF
ADDEES CONCUP PRESENT PLAN IS FOR AMFRAME-1 DEPART WAVE AREA FOR
CARACAS 3 ODEC WHERE HE WILL OBTAIN JAPANESE VISA, TICKETS,
AND DOCUMENTATION ATTESTING TO VENEZUELAN BUSINESS CONNECTIONS.
DEPART CARACAS FOR TOKY UNTIL WAVE SO INSTRUCTS.
3. EQUESI CONTACT INSTRUCTION PLUS HOTEL RY RETURN CAPLE
IN ORDER PASS AMERAME-1 PRIO DEPARTURE FOR CARACAS.
SECRETO CONCUR
-
LEGITAMaikli
=
CFN:
AMFCAME/1
n
09926
CA✓
REPRESTAT Stef AS CURANFIC
Sici
7755 5663 7714 AMGRAME-1 AMSCROLL A AMFRAME-1 JAPAN 13 DEC
AMFRAME-1 CARACAS 9. 10 DEC JAPANESE VENEZUELAN NOT DEPART AMFRAME-1
UT
SECRET
L
.G
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_335.jpeg ---
**
14-00000
INDER YES ☐ NO
☐
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID □ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ACTION
J WAVE
6
Tater 14/18
INF
1
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
19-121-76
32
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
-
☐ ☐ ☐ Te
PEPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
76
EK
MO
FILE OR FC8, WHY, 11/00, C1/085, 01/102,
N/04
SECRET 0300472
PRIORITY TOKY INFO DIR CITE HAVE 7756
NO NIGHT ACTION
TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF: WAVE 7755
AU
(N09926)
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UR)
IDEN:
SECRET
CFN: 7755 7755 MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA UR
TIME
CAZ
8 DEC 65 IN 09921
4
"F
BY
L
BT
SECRET
1
1
;
'
ott
SC

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_337.jpeg ---
14-00000
P1652
1
}
SECRET 12 10615
OPFLK FIRMS OF SOYING AGAINST CUPA, CALLS MUP
INTL SPY RINC SERVING IMPERIALISTS PLANS
AGAINST CUBA," CHASTIZES PIVAS FOR NOT NAMING
GREEK FIRMS, RIC. SPYING AGAINST CUBA, AND STATES
CIA'S CUBAN AGENTS DOING THEIR WORK. EDITORIAL
ENDS AS FOLL "SPYING AGAINST THOSE WHO OPEN .
THEIR COUNTRY AND PORTS TO GREEK SHIPS IS COMPLETELY
IN CONTRACT WITH MORALS OF ORBEY MERCHANT MAPINE
AND OPPOSED TO GREEK NATIONAL IPADITIONS."
3. PARA & ABOVE FLAYED BY OUR UNILATERAL
MHSPAWN AGEN! THUNIFORM/15 WHO WILL ANSWEP AVGI
EDITORIAL IN FOLL VEIN:
Ao INIL COMMIE ORGAN AVGI DEFENDS
COMMIE CUPA ETC BECAUSE OF INIL COMMUNISM'S :
DESIRE MAINTAIN MINORITY DICTATOPSHIP (WITNESS
=
RECENT EXCDUS FROM CUBA HOWEVER, AVGI HAS
"
FAILED MISERABLY IN DEFENDING CREEK HONOR,
TRADITIONAL DEMOCRACY ETC BY FAILING TO ASK FOR
RECALL GALBE WHO VIOLATED MOST ELEMENTARY BASES
DEMOCRACY. HUMAN DIGNITY, FREE SPEECH, EIC.
SECRET
:
=

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_336.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDERT ☐ YES ☐ no
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
PELE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ◎
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
ROM
ACTION
INFO
ATHENS
WN1/28
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE.
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
D/
☑ RID COPY
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
☐ FITNES ☐ SLOTTED ☐ .....
FILE, we wis Fíl, end,
1/107;
19-12-0-26/3
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TINE
1/12 Doy, D0/113,
D04,
8 DEC 65 IN 10615
RR
E
SECRET 081530Z
:
75
'.1.-
***. .
WAVE INFO MÁDR DIR CITE ATHE 7960.
L
1
TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF WAVE 7226 (74157)*
1. 1 DEC GREEK DAILY VRADYNI IN FRONT PAGE
ARTICLE ENTITLED "GREEK COMPANIES JOIN STRUGGLE
AGAINST THE REDS" PUBLISHES LETTER FROM "DR.
RAF. RIVAS VAZGEZ OF ANTI-CASTRO ORGANIZATION
MOVIMENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (MUR)" (SIC).
LETTER PRAISES AND THANKS UNIDENTIFIED GREEK
FIRMS, SHIPPING COMPANIES, AND PEOPLE WHO
TRADITIONALLY DEFEND DEMOCRATIC AND ANTI-COMMIE
CAUSES FOR PROVIDING VALUABLE INFO TO MUR
ECONOMIC RESEARCH OFFICE." ALSO, "VERY FEW",
PUCH AS I SAVLIRIS SHIPPING CO., DISHONOP GREEK
FLOR AND PEOPLES RE ACTIVITIES TOWARDS CUET.
3 DEC COMMIE FRONT DAILY AVGI IN FRONT
PAGE EVITORIAL "SPIES PRAISED IN PUBLIC" ANSWERS
ABOVE VPYNI ARTICLE.
ACCUSES "COOPEPATING"
REGAL

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_338.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
±
CRET
IN 10615
Moi
B. AVGI HAS CRITICIZED "IMPERIALISTS
PLANS AGAINST CUBA" SINCE BEGINNING CASTRO
REGIME, ESPECIALLY DURING
PRESIDENT KENNEDY'S
TENURE IN OFFICE. YET, ON 21 NOV 65 AVGI
PRAISED KENNEDY, STATED WARREN COMMISSION REPORT
UNTRUE USING OBVIOUSLY FALSE PICTURES AND STATEMENTS,
AND CLAIMED KENNEDY KILLED BY "UNDEMOCRATIC DARK
FORCES." HOW CAN AVGI TAKE THIS STAND UNLESS IT
IS ACTING ON ORDERS FROM MOSCOW OR POSSIBLY
PEKING TO DISCREDIT U.S.?
4. HAVE NO OBJECTION REPLAY PARA 1 AND 2
ITEMS BUT SUGGEST WAVE, THROUGH AMSCROLL OR
OTHER SUITABLE ASSETS, REPLY TO AVGI EDITORIAL
VIA LETTER TO ENTIRE GREEK PRESS (PER EKAA 13086)
USING PARA 3 ABOVE ARGUMENTS PLUS ANY OTHER
DEROG INFO PERTAINING TO THIS THEME, PARTICULARLY
USE OF CASTRO BY INTL COMMUNISM TO SPREAD GERM
OF TOTALITARIAN COMMUNISM TO OTHER DEMOCRATIC
LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES ETC..
5, AIRMAILING ABOVE CLIPS WITH TRANSLATIONS.
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_339.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
Til 10615 PAGE4
PLS ADVISE WHETHER PARA 4 ACTION AGREEABLE TO ALL.
IF SO, PEQUEST DIR FORWARD 21 NOV AVGI MATEPIALS
TO WAVE AND MADR ASAP.
6. FOR WAVE: HAS PEF ACTION OCCURRED ?
7. NO INDEX.
f
SECOTTY
WAVE
PRE POW
PAPER
WILL FORWARD TU 7 Sirimoros
CFN 79 7225 1 VRADYNI DR. RAF. RIVAS VAZQEZ ANTI-CASTRO
MOVIMENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (MUR) SIC MUR ISAVLIRIS RE CUBA
3 DEC AVGI VRADYNI MUP. NOT NAMING ETC CIA'S 1 MHSPAWN THUNIFORM/15
AVGI AVGIAVGI ETC GALBE ETC AVGI CASTRO KENNEDY'S 21 65
AVGI WARRER AVGI MOSCOW PEKING U.S. NO OBJECTION 1 2 AMSCROLL
AVGI EKAA 17386 3 LATIN AMERICAN 4 21 AVGI NO INDEX
BI
'
'
5
(

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_34.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNIDAD MONTHLY, ISSUE, NO. 37, May, 1967
This issue has boon almost entirely devoted to a roprint of I. Andrés Collazo's sta-
tomont concerning his experience as a CUFLET representative in London. Wo have re-
printed most of the contents of the statement in the form of a signed article onti-
tled "INSIDE CUFLET".
As is known, Collazo tells of the "dog fights" that have rison between the privateers
(such as FRANGISTAS) and CUFLET over violations of contracts, bad condition of the
ships, etc.
Ho also discusses the decline in free-world shipping to Cuba and its causos, as well
as the nature and background of the shippers that participate in the Cuban trade,
Bosidos the above, the following is included in this issue:
PAGE 11
EDITORIAL: "A COMMUNIST TRUTH": Volsky, the Chief of the Soviet observing delegation
to the CEPAL mooting in Caracas, said that "Cuba is the minor daughter of the USSR,
and minor daughtors are pampered". The Russian's insolence has roused the anger of
all well-born Cubans. Yet, there's a lot of truth in what the Russian said.
Indeed, minor daughters depend on their parents, get everything they need from them,
and are subject to their supreme authority. If the daughter works, she must also turn
a good part of the fruits of her toil over to her parents.
}
This is what happens with Cuba and the USSR. The Soviets and their satellites sell
Cuba 78.6% of her imports, dictate the policy of the Havana régime, and take 80% of
her exports.
In view of this dependence, who can deny that the relation between Cuba and Russia is
that of a minor daughter with respect to her parents?
The Russian only lied when he spoke of "pampering". Cuba is not pampered by Mother
Russia: she is oppressed, exploited and corrupted by
!
her.
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_340.jpeg ---
14-00000
☐ YES ☐ NO
INDEX: ☐ YES
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
KREF TO FILE NO.
1
PILE RID ☐ RET. TO PRANCE
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ACTION
INFO
TOKYO
WH/CS
CL
ED MESSAGE
53/53 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
1
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
-
☑ RID COPY ☐ (asure ☐ SLOTTE ☐ TUDED
9-123-26
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
TC-
EL
TIME.
UNIT
IC, VI, FE8, CI, CI/OA, C₁/OPS, C1/162, F1, F1/04, CDC, CAZ
FILE
i
SECRET 70654Z
PRIORITY HAVE INFO DIR CITE TOKY 5663
REFS: A. TOKY 5639 LIN 07192
B. MAVE 7714
(108803)
*
ACTION
CONCUR AMFRAME ONE IF HE CUBAN AND CAN LEGITIMATELY REPRESENT
SELF AS OFFICIAL CUBAN EXILE ORGANIZATION.
IF POSSIBLE WOULD PREFER
REVOLUTIONARY ALLIANCE. IF AMFRAME ONE MEETS THESE NEEDS SUGGEST
HE MAKE NECESSARY ARRANGEMENTS DEPART FOR JAPAN 13 DEC. PLS
AWAIT FURTHER WORD FROM US HOWEVER BEFORE DISPATCHING HIM.
SECRET
CFN:
BT
'
5663 5639 7714 AMFRAME 13 DEC PLS
:
* stated A/1 Is
Station Agent
RESPENSIVE to
SECRET KbARK directina.
=
"
+
,
NNNN
PATIE
:
>

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_341.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
"
0:
TT/nea
C/CA/PP
18/9138
.7 DEC 65
¡JMWAVE TOKYO
FROM: DIRECTOR
☐ INDEX
XX NO INDEX
MESSAGE FORM
TOTAL COPIESI
S-E-C-R-E-T
7°
☐ FILE IN CS FILE NO.
CONF
DC/111/c5
INFO: VR
•
..VE TOKY
RYBAT TYPIC ZRWAGON
** RETURN TO BRANCH
XXXXXXXXXX
☐ DESTROM.
26
__
1
pp
2
3
CA
ROUTING
S
☐ FILE RID
CICS
6 MO
72
EX-TC 8 ☑
D
8 DEC 65 17 49E
19-120-26
FILE ☐ RID COPY ADDP C/FE8
SIG CEF
6/81 6/812 9/APY CDC 9/CAZ
C/F1.2 C/AP24
INFO
REF WAVE 7714 (IN 08803)*
1. HQS CONCURS USE AMFRAME-1.
2.
CITE DIR
63721
FOR TOKY:STATION MAY WISH CONSIDER USE ADDITIONAL CASE OFFICER
WITH PERUMEN BACKGROUND SUCH AS HENRY P. REBHOTZ. J
:
END OF MESSAGE
* VAVE proposes sending AMFRAME-1 to assist TOKY in defection ops of
Cuban seamen,
M..
C/FE
✓ WILLIAM V. BROE
C/H/C/CA Choco
C/WH/C/MO
·FE/JKO/J Stenger (JFS)
JOHN L. HART
DCWHD/C
MELEASING OFFICER
6-19
COORDINATING OFFICERS
S-E-C-R-E-T
GROUP 1
Excluded from quis
““Šowngrading qua
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
COPY NO.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_344.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
H.E. Fleas Tadrinokes
Pazo 3
December 7, 1963
Another Castruito affront to a Western European nation in which Galbe
was instrır:ontal/
Lastly, ve idish to call your attention on the fact that the more
decent and stahlo of Cuba's diplomatic representatives have shown that
they cannot stemi Cantro's monkery of diplomacy and international law,
As amples, we can cite the very recent defections of Years, Luis
R. Alonro romÅvies, Orban Arbassador to Great Britain: Alberto Alema.
my Vilar, Esanomic Counselor of the Cuban Embnegy in Innant odón Alva –
res de la Cama, Bonomic Counselor of the Cuban Fribasay in maint and
Alberto Cobra Infants, Rconomic Attaché of the Orban Imbassy in Spain.
Individually and collectively, the decent peoples of the world are
disassociating themselves from the infamy of Castroian. Just now, the
cream of Oha's own population —professional non, lusinosem, intelleg
tnalo, o^.— is about to join the spent part of the greatest mass c
of...
dus recorded by History sime World War II,
Let us asamo that the font that a given régizo la sairdurons and
totalitarian were not monson enough for the nation with the oldest dong
oratio trakton to bronk all ties idth it. By ary standart, Calbe's
prepostarms behaviour at Thermopilas is more than racoon enough. And
his contiming affronts to the Greek people give even more reason,
confident that this time, our advice, which is the advice
of relief and affection, will not go unheeded. .
Sincerely yours,
Onterlie
Fario Sciglio Contore
Secretary snoral
:
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
TELEFONO FR 3-8033

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_345.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
INDENT ☐ YES ☐ No
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
REFT PILE NO.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
FILE RIG ☐ RET.
DESTROY ☐ Ste.
TO BRANCH ◎
7
SECRET
UNIT NOTIFIED
JAWAVE
ACTION
WN/C✓ RID COPY
☑
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
M
23
☐ ☐ ☐ SUDEE
THE DR ADDPE/FE 8 c/c c/Fi
SECRET 061800Z
DIR INFO TOKY CITE WAVE 7714
RYBAT TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF TOKY 5639
-
14-120-26
TC
FI
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
MO
UNIT
TIME
KICS.
☐ CA_
NEW..
✓
DY
we
6/81/0.43
6 DEC 65 08803
SACTIO
(IN07192)
1. WAVE PROPOSES AMFRAME-1 FOR REF OP IN VIEW ABILITY,
-
JUDGMENT, FLUENCY ENGLISH AND IMMEDIATE AVAILABILITY. HE HAS
PARTICIPATED IN PREPARATION LEAFLETS SENT TOKY. DUE IMPORTANT
FAMILY CONNECTIONS IN CARACAS (FATHER AND UNCLE ARE SENIOR
VENEZUELAN GOVT EMPLOYEES) IT POSSIBLE AMFRAME-1 COULD OBTAIN
VENEZUELAN PASSPORT AND AS MINIMUM SHOULD BE ABLE EASILY OBTAIN
L
1
=
1
1
:
;
!
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_343.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR
}
1
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
H.E. Floas Tairinakos
Page 2
December 7, 1965
Ho is a naturalised Cuban of Spanish origin. He loft Spain because of
the Spanish Civil thr where he was organisor and Prosecutor of the Red Popy
lar Tribunals,
No moval to Havana, Cuba in 1941 and worked on several newspapers and
radio stations. He has always been outstanding for his violonce and politi
cal scandals in favor of the Communists and lost several jobs due to his ex
plosive, violan nature. He was named Professor of Penal Law in the Univer
ety of Oriento in 1950, and became associated with a group knɔm as "The
Communtat professors of the Santiago University".
The Castro brothers, Fidel and Rail, began the final phase of their ra
volt in 1957 from the larva l'aostra mountains. During this time, and from
his home in Santiago de Cuba, Galho was in clandestino contact with the ra.
volt. His hone was an essential link in the communication channal with the
low-lands. During this period Vilma Beyin (Ref] Castro's fanatically com
munist wife) and even Raul hirsalf ware secret visitors to Galbe's home.
And what was Galho's reward for all of this supporti Immediately after Can
tro occupial Havana (Jarmary 1, 1959) Galbo was named Havana's Drector of
Prisona cr of trining ground for the future diplomat, Nort, Galbo wa –
named Agregado Cultural (Cultural Attaché) in the Cuban basy to me and
from there to his present position in Athens,
Galbe is a known schizophrenic and there is a history of mental dison
dæ in his faily. Els brother, Pascual, committed side. His mother,
who died in Oba in 1954, was insane, Her brother, a former Canon of the
Cathodrel do La Seo de Zaragoza, also was insane,
On the point that concerns Galbe's role in the organisation and functio
ning of the Communist "Topular" Courts during the hardah Civil War, it is
interesting to note that his name is listed in the "Casa General" (General
Cause), the handsh Government's mass indictment of the most outstanding Red
perpetrators of atrocities during the conflict. For the sme reason, Galbe
is among the for Spanish exiles who have been fordres basmal fron his home.
land by the authorities.
Yet, in a characteristic display of nerve, the Castro goverment last
February issued a special diplomatic passport to Galbe so that this former
undesirable fish citizen could enter the country that had banned him and
attend a conference of Qaban Heads of Mplomatic Missions that met in Madrid,
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
TELEFONO FR 3-8033
YOUT

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_342.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
ben
UR
-
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
Miami, Docoriber 7, 1965
F.E. Eloas Tririnokos
Foreign Minister
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Athens, Greco
Excellerays
In the past, we have addressed several lotters to Grod: Covernment of
ficials concoming the case of José Luis Galbo, the Cuban Chargé d'Affadros
in Athons, to have informed the representatives of the Greck: people of Gal.
he's notorious background as a gangster and Commurd et agitator, a background
to which he lived up recently when ho shot at a Greek bus driver at Thermoph
lae over a trivial traffic-argument and, instead, shot his wife.
We are, and proudly so, relentless onades of the regime that Galbe ra.
prosents in eros, However, when wo regret the indignity wrought over the
Grock nation by its Government's failure to expal him, we are not acting out
of political passion. Mardly, you will agree that whom the head of a diplo.
matic mission publicly fires his gun on the citizens of the country where he
is accrodital, ho is acting with utmost disrespect for the lare of that coun
try and, hense, for the country as a whole. The least he deserves is to bo
declara purænna non grata', and that only if the offonial government is so
benevolent as to overlook the fact that the insult is roally coming from the
régine that salents the criránally insane as its representatives abroad,.
We, as losterners of liediterranean origin, have always falt somewhat a.
kin to the Great people, whom we also adrdre as the diront dose anciants of the
ancient fathers of Civilization. Therefore, we were honestly saddened to se0 ·
that the past coverment of your country placed the porconal friendship of
two gangstars -Galbe and Andreas Papandreou above the age-old dignity of
the Hellenic nation. And we are anddened even more than those actions are .
described in detail in the press,
On the other hand, our insistence on the subjent, comofiat unorthodox as
it may be fræ: the protocol standpoint, is definitely inspired by the friend
liest of sublunts, while Galbe's failure to observe the most elementary č.
plomatic relac has been evidenced in a most hostilo — and dangerous- marmer,
Therefore, we are confident that you will excuse us if we provide fur „
ther evidence of the Castro régime's and Galbe's personal content for free
nations such as Gresce. Immediately following is a summary of the 'dossier'
mich
that we have compiled on José Luis Galbet
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI,
FLORIDA
TELEFONO FR 3-8033
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_346.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
%
P-2
IN 18102
JAPANESE VISA IN CARACAS THUS ON SURFACE ORIGINATING TRIP THERE.
WOULD TRAVEL AS TOURIST/PUSINESSMAN.
THIS WOULD ADD TO
i
PLAUSIBILITY DENIAL REQUIREMENT DESCRIBED REF. IF ADDEES CONCUR WILL
NEED NAME HOTEL IN TOKY PLUS CONTACT PLAN.
2.
:
FOR TOKY: AMFRAME-1 (IDEN) IS STATION AGENT REPSONSIVE
TO KUBARK DIRECTION.
SECRET
}
˚ CFN 7714 5639 AMFRAME-1 OP CARACAS -1 JAPANESE - 1 KUBARK !
BT
SEGRET
* REQUESTED APPROPRIATE EXECUTIVE of CUBAN Exile
OLIVIN READY FOR BROUPT DISPATCH TO JAPAN To stand
CONTACTS WAN DERECTORS FROM Ship
}
i
!
I
.F
|

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_347.jpeg ---
WARP KISWAÆpen t
14-00000
INDEXT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-PTO FILE NO.
FILE AID
☐ ACT.
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
-
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TO GRANCH ☐
2
TAWOVE
ACTION
DE
Total COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
✓ RID COPY
***
25 17.170 26
☐ e ☐ ☐ TUBER
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITIO
TC
CICS
•CA.
EW_
MO.
.12
+
FILE VE ADD C/FE 8 c/c1 C/F12.C/E1/24 s
SECRE T 06180OZ
DIR INFO TOKY CITE WAVE 7715
RYBAT TYPIC ZRWAGON
REF
6 DEC 65.08781
ACTIONS
7714 (1108803
WAVE 7714
IDEN: RAFAEL
SECRET
(201-272751
RAFAEL VIVA S- VAZQUEZ” (201)
CFN 7715 7714 RAFAEL VIVAS-VAZQUEZ 291-278758
BT
:
SECRE
*
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
020
PAGE 21
CARTOON: (By Luis R. Cáceres, Jr.): A shabby-looking character faces Castro and
tells him: "You're a nosy liar and an adventuror!". A Cuban in the foreground
asks a friend: "Who is that, a "gusano"?" "No", replies the friend. "That's a
Latin American pro-Soviet Communist"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_348.jpeg ---
3543
14-00000
INDEXT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLA II
FILE RI
FILE NO.
☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY: ☐ SIG.
FROM
JMWAVE
ACTION
IMPO
04/08)
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
26/20
30 SECRET
PE#SON/UNIT NOTIFIED
☑ RID COPY
FILE VR, CAZ, CA/PROP, ciles
-
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
H
☐ ☐
19-120-26.
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP=
Mo
EL
CA
D
✓
TIME
1
J DEC 65 IN 05849
SECRET Ø12209Z
DIR CITE WAVE 7627
TYPIC MHSPAWN AMWA SP
REF: DIR 60778
PREFER JOURNAL REQUEST INTERVIEW THROUGH AMSCROLL IN VIEW AMWASP-1
OVERT CONNECTION. LETTER SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO AMWASP-1 CARÉ OF
IDEN.
AMWASP-1 AVAILABLE GO NEW YORK ANY TIME.
SECRET
CFN 7627 60778 AMSCROLL AMWASP-1
A-
..
1 NEW YORK
BT
SECRET
STHERE JOURNAL OF COMMERCE HAS NO REPARSENTATIVE
WAVE HE20
AMWASP/I MUST TRAVEL NEwYork
i
¦
1
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_349.jpeg ---
14-00000
L
INDEX
☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSI TO FILE NO.
K-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID
RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
JMWAVE
ACTION
INFO
WH/CB)
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
26 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
-
☑ RID COPY
FILE VR, CAZ, CALPROP, cage
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
JP-
Mo
EL
UNIT
ADVANCE COPY
☐ yere
TIME
CA
C
SECRET Ø12209Z
DIR CITE WAVE 7628
1 DEC 65 05843
TYPIC MHSPAWN AMWASP
REF:
(11
05849)
WAVE 7627 12 05849
IDEN: C/O DR. MARIO SIEGLIE MONTORO, SECRETARY GENERAL,
SECRET
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
10 SE 9 ST
MIAMI, FLORIDA
OFN 7628 7627 C/O DR. MARIO SIEGLIE MONTORO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
1W SE 9 ST MIAMI FLORIDA
35
SECRET
N
NNN

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_350.jpeg ---
14-00000
4
G
1
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
REF. TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ HET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
•IMWAYE
ASTAN
114/8/8
FILE
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
31
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
+
-
☑ RID COPY ☐ ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUBEO
1.9-120.26.
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
PP-
CA
LVS, FE 8, CAZ, CA/AROP, TODS, 12, 12/04, 07, 07/pes, c/cz, Doc
Efcret 262-252
Die
ACTION
INFO TOKY OKIE CITE WAVE
TYPIC MHVIPER ZRWA GON
・THO
RR
EL-T
TIME
26 Nov 65.02688
1
PEPS: A. DIR 60144
Bo
TOKY 5582 (IN 99160)
C.
DIR 37871
1. PER REF A WAVE DECIDED AMSCROLL MOST LOGICAL OR G IT NOW
PREPARING 200 SMALL MIMEO (PAPHED FOLDED HAND CUT UNDER ITS NAME
(FUT NOT ADDRESS).
FROMT SAYS
"
MESSAŒE IC OUR COMPATRIOTS
APOARD ILESIAS," INSIDE TWO PACES SAY "YOUR SHIP WHEN REPAIRED
WILL SAIL FOR FRIGID AND ICHOSPITABLE WATERS OF NORTH KOREA
FOR MILITARY CAR 00 TO CARRY TO NORTH VIETNAM. THESE ARE DANGEROUS
AND UNFRIENDLY WATERS AND NO MAN'S SAFETY CAN BE GUARANTEED NERE
(WHAT WOULD YOU DO IF YOUR SHIP RAN A GROUND IN NORTH KOREAT OR.
HIT A MINE IN NORTH VIETNAM ? WHAT TO DO? FOLLOW PAIN YOUR
COUNTRYMEN. LEAVE WHILE YOU HAVE CHANCE.
BACK PAGE FOLLUNS LINE PARA
HOW TO DO THIS.
- 2 A REF B AND ENDS WIN THIS WAY
1
YOU WILL AVOID CERTAIN AND UNNECESSARY DANCER",
2. WILL CABLE WHEN HANDOUTS POUCHED.
LETTERS (IN ENGLISH
REQUESTED PARA 2 B, REF B WILL BE READY FOR MAILING WEEK 23 NOV.
P,
WILL NOT MAIL UNIIL ADVISED BY ICKY TO DO sa
SECRI
HOWEVER, WILL POUCH
i
F

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_351.jpeg ---
14-00000
THSE 20F2
M02688
Co
✓ PIES WHEN IN FINAL FORM.
SECRET
CFN: 7506 50144 5502 5757! A AMSCROLL ORG 290 NOT ADDRESS
IGLESIAS NORTH KOREA NORTH VIETNAM NO MAN'S A 2 A BENG.ISH
2 B B 29 NOV NOT MAIL TOKY
ET.
SECRET
1
i
Te
1
1
ļ
:
44
1
t
¦
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_352.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDERS ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. 14-1:21 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
X-REF TO FILE NO.
19 24
FILE RID ☐ RET, TO BRANCH
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ACTION
JMWAVE
34 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
Amacrall
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
GROUP
WH/C8 ✓ AID COPY ☐ ☐ ☐ TUDED
SLOTTED
0
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TIME
FILE VR, FE8, CA?, CA/PROP, D04, DO/H3
16 Nov 65.95100
i
SECRET 152323Z
DIR INFO TOKY CITE WAVE 7263 (INGHURST ACTING)
MHVOPER AMSCROLL
REF: TOKY 5400
(93257) *
AMWASP-1 NOW WORKING WITH AMSCROLL TO PREPARE REF MATERIAL WHICH
WILL BE FORWARDED ON AMSCROLL LETTERHEAD TO REACH TOKY BY 15 DEC.
ANY ADDITIONAL INFO HOS MAY HAVE SHOULD BE POUCHED FOR INCLUSION
THIS PAPER. * RE. MATERIAL ON
ON JAP.-CUBA
SECRET
TRADE,
CFN 7263 INGHURST 5400 AMWASP-1 AMSCROLL 15 DEC
BT
Do por
D
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_356.jpeg ---
F
14-00000
-
IN 8655 13.3
AND IS BROTHER OF SUBJ OF 201-352552 (FOR DITIONAL
\ 1962 OF 23 MAY 63).
3. STATION CANNOT JUDGE ACCURACY ABOVE REPORTS ON GALSE
BACKGROUND. NOULD APPRECIATE ANY CONFIRMATION OR ADDITIONAL INFO
1
HSE AND MADE CAR PROVIDE.
PROVIDE. IF REPORTS ESSENTIALLY TRUE, COULD BE
WED IN LETTERS TO GALBE THREATENING EXPOSURE OR SENT BY AMSCROLL
TO SALE AND PUBLICIZED PER PARA 2 REF B. PLS ADVISE.
7. INDEX GALGS.
ECRET
CFC 7822 8792 7502 2 A AMBLEAK-I A AMSCROLL SPAIN GALBE ZARAGOZA
SPAIN 1954 CUBA CANONIGO (CANON) CATHEDRAL DE LA SEO DE ZARAGOZA
SCHIZOPHRENIC SPANISH FISCAL DE LOS TRIBUNALES POPULARES CAUSA
CENERAL NOT PERMITTED FRA CE HAVANA INFORMACION 1944 PICS XII
133% CRIENTE SANTIAGO VILMA ESPIN SAUL ROA'S FIDEL CASTRO
SIERRA MAESTRA JAN 59 ROME B 2 AMBLEAK-1 B AMBLEAK-1'S 201-
352552 UFGA 21952 23 MAY 632 B
3T
★ Amscroll
SHILD, WRITE, LETTER.
SECRET
5984
:
.:
K
|

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_354.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
INDER: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
• X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
OM
j
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
TOTAL COPIES 22
22
SECRET
PERSON UNIT NOTIFIED
JMWAVE
ACTION
ADVANCE COPY
DE/WH/C5
☑ RID COPY
☐
☐ SLOTTED
INFO
☐
19-120-76
Tee
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
☑FI
JCA
BR
MO
UNIT
TIME D BY
✓
FILE, VA ADDP, C/663 U/WEZ C/CAR 6/61 6/21/53 C/FIR
SECRET 0328292.
3 Nov 65.86558
1
ACTIONE
DIR INFO ATHE MADR CITE WAVE 7
RYCAT TYPIC MHSPAWN THUNIFORM
REF A WAVE 6792 (NOT SENT MADR)
3 ATHE 7523 (NOT SENT MADR)
(79235
176839)
·
1. RÉ PARA 2 REF A AMBLEAK-I HAS DEVELOPED FOLLOWING INFO FROM
IDENTITY A WHO RADIO SCRIPT WRITER FOR AMSCROLL AND WHO FORMERLY
WORKED IN SPAIN ON SAME PAPER AS CALBE: GALBE BORN ZARAGOZA, SPAIN
OF PROMINENT AND WEALTHY PARENTS. MOTHER WAS INSANE AT TIME OF HER
DEATH IN 1954 IN CUBA. HER BROTHER WHO AT ONE TIME CANCNIGO (CANON)
OF THE CATHEDRAL DE LA SEO DE ZARAGOZA ALSO INSANE AT TIME MOTHER'S
DEATH. GALSE IS KNOWN TO HAVE INHERITED INSANITY TRAITS FROM
:
MATERNAL SIDE AND IS SCHIZOPHRENIC.
A
2. GALBE EDUCATED AS LAWYER. DURING SPANISH CIVIL WAR HE
ACTIVE IN CREATING "POPULAR COURTS" AND WAS PROSECUTOR (FISCAL DE
LCS TRIBUNALES POPULARES) OF THOSE OPPOSED TO SPANISH REPUBLIC,
BECAME FAMOUS DUE FEROCITY OF ATTACKS AGAINST DEFENDANTS. DUE THIS
AND HIS COMMIE ACTIVITIES AT THAT TIME NOW LISTED IN THE CAUSA
GENERAL REPEAT CAUSA GENERAL AND THEREFORE NOT PERMITTED RETURN
TO SPAIN.
;
1
L
I
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_353.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
TO
DI PATCH
Chief, WH
CLASSIFICATION
PROCESSING
SECRET
3*380)
ACTION
POSED
ACCOM
PUSHED
MARKED FOR INTESING
INFO
FROM
SUBJECT
0
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
TYPIC/MHSPAWN/Operational
"
Luiz GOMEZ Wanguemert Commentary
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
AR: FYI
REF:
DIR-53981, 28 October 65
X
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEAD/VARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
As Headquarters is aware, JMWAVE is refuting on a con-
tinuing basis and via all appropriate assets commentaries
similar to that discussed in the reference. As for this
particular GOMEZ broadcast the Station prepared a guidance
for AMSCROLL use, primarily its radio, the point of which
was that GOMEZ had become eligible for the "Foot 'n Mouth
Club" due his admission on 21 October that Camarioca was a
plebiscite and his statement on 22 October, no doubt as a
result of a prod from his Communist superiors that "I think
I made excessive concessions ..." explaining that the people
are really leaving due to economic reasons. We agree and
say that the economic reasons are to obtain three meals a
day, to be able to walk into a market and buy eggs and milk.
The guidance ends with this: "You may take your foot out of
your mouth now, GOMEZ".
÷
Roger E. Limitand
for Philip G. ELMARD
L
Distribution:
WH/C
3
-
CS COPY
F.
Excludes m
downgrading 216
1 CROSS REFERENCE TO
19-120-26
DATE TYPED
10 Nov 65
• fant
DATE DISPATCHED
NOV 15 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-23825
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
♦ 19-132-49/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_355.jpeg ---
14-00000
7
:
i
SEUNE)
IN
76001
AFTER CIVIL WAR CALDE WENT FRANCE AND MARRIED FRENCHISHAD.
30TH NOVED
A WHERE SHE PROSPERED OWNING A BEAUTY SHOP. KE
LIVED OFF PARILY WEALTH AND HELD JOBS ON A NUMBER OF NEWSPAPERS,
NEVER STONED LONG ANY ONE JOB DUE EXPLOSIVE NATURE AND ACTUALLY
FIRED FROM INTERNACION REPEAT INFORMACION. IN EARLY FORTIES TURNED
TO RADIC WORK AND IN 1944 FIRED FROM RADIO STATION OF CUBAN MIN-
ISTRY OF EDUCATION DUE VIOLENT ATTACK POPE PIUS XII. CIRCA 1953
CALDE OBTAINED JCB AS PROFESSOR OF PENAL LAW AT UNIVERSITY OF
CRIENTE KIN SANTIAGO) WHERE HE ASSOCITED WITH LEFTISTS. BIGAN
INDOCTRINATING STUDENTS IN COMMUNISM. AMONG ATTENDEES WAS VILKA
ESPIN (RAUL ROA'S WIFE). GALBE'S SANTIAGO HOME WAS RELAY CENTER
FOR MESSAGES TO AND FROM FIDEL CASTRO THEN FIGHTING IN THE SIZPRA
MAESTRA.
4. IN JAN 59 NAMED PRISON DIRECTOR AND THEREAFTER CULTURAL
ATTACHE TO ROME.
5. IDENTITY 3, A CUBAN NATIONAL WHO KNEW GALBE DURING CUBA.
A
PERIOD CONFIRNED PARA 2 STATEMENTS AND TOLD AMBLEAK-1 THAT GALBE
PARTICIPATED IN FAKE TRIALS OF ANTICOMMMUNITS AND AS PROSECUTOR
ALWAYS DEMANDED DEATH PENALTY. IDENTITY B IS AN INFORMANT OF AM-
)

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_358.jpeg ---
14-00000
****
:
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECT
ATION
-
DISPATCH.
GOL AND NUMBLA
Seperate Cover Attach-
ment #2; UFGA 23469
IDENTITY:
ARTURO MANAS,
Vice-President, Czarnikow-Rionda Company,
New York. (Sugar Brokers)
5/c. att #2
NORM
ULEGA 2349
8.60 53a
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
(40)
CS COPY
19-120-26
PAGENO
CLASSIFICATION
SE CE T
CONTINUE
☑1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_357.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
10
BIO.
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
FROM
SE
_ ICATION
ET
DU
✗
PROCESSING
ACTION
MARKED FOR INDELING
NO INDEKING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADVARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
CROFILM
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
C AMSCROLL/Publication on Cuban Sugar Problems
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED: FYI
1. We forward under separate cover subject publication which was
recently sent to AMSCROLL mail recipients interested in economic
material. In producing this study a particular effort was made to
keep it objective and factual on the theory that in the case of sugar
the facts speak for themselves and need only to be pulled together.
We also believe that objective material similar to the attached should
over a period of time enhance the reputation of the AMSCROLL economic
section as a serious and objective outfit that seeks to discredit the
Castro regime by publicizing the truth.
2.
The Station would appreciate Headquarters' reaction to this
publication. Additional copies are available should distribution via
KMFORGET or other means be desired.
3. It may be of interest to report that a copy of the attached
report has been mailed to Identity, currently in Geneva where he is
representing his company at the sugar conference. This was done
directly under the AMSCROLL economic section letterhead and via
AMWORD-1's brother, an employee in the research department of
Identity's company.
Rosa E.
mare whanh
for Philip G. ELMARD
19-123-26
Attachments:
1. Publication, USC,
2. Identity, USC
Distribution:
✓3- WH/C, w/att., USC
GROUP 1
Factor! from
CROSS REFERENCE TO
žatts
DATE TYPED
8 Oct 65
DATE DISPATCHED
OCT 12 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
CS COPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
UFGA-23469
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-132-49/4
:
:
1
i
IMAGEM HLÄGEN VERNACLİ SILK Revea

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_36.jpeg ---
1
14-00000
0
6 E C R ET
Chief of Station, Rio de Janeiro
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JHWAVE
DYVOUR/PBRUNCH/MHVIPER
Material on Trading with Cuba
XX
References:
A.
B.
DIRECTOR 02837
RIO DE JANNINO 3756
Par reference A we forward by separate cover
material produced and released by the AHNCROLL organi-
sation which we hope will be helpful in meeting your
requirement to provide ALT PID-1 with information on
the negative aspects of commercial trading with Cuba.
Roger E. HARCHBANK
Attachments:
1.
3.
Maritime 5th Column press releases (U/S/C)
Defectors statements (U/S/C)
9. ANSCROLL Economic Reports (U/S/C)
Distribution
CCS, Rio de Janeiro, w/atts, USC aut pouch.
CH, w/o atts
WH/COG, w/o atts
20
MAY 29 1967
26 May 67
UFGA 27672
Exters
CS COPY
10_138_2R/9
19-125-26
:
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_359.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
INFO.
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PONED
XX
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
© MHVIPER/Exploitation Cuban Trade Practices
ACTION REQUIRED FENENCES.
ACTION REQUIRED: For use as Headquarters determines
REFERENCES:
A.
B.
WAVE-5942.
DIR-45158
PROCESSING
IP
ACTION
MADRES FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING PEQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
REAL/7JARTERS DESK
Can Post INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MUSOFILM
ACCOM
PLISHED
1. We forward by separate cover the article described in the
references. It is the first item in the AMSCROLL economic report
which can and should be attributed to AMSCROLL research.
It may
be of interest to record that the first paragraph of this item was
developed from 0/27839-65 of 17 September as authorized by reference B.
The second paragraph was developed from a lead obtained from 0/27842-65
of 22 September which sent us to two publications by Merrill Lynch,
Pierce, Fenner and Smith. The last sentence of paragraph 3 was
developed from information in the Wall Street Journal of 22 and 28
September.
2. The Station of course will be interested in any replay
generated by Headquarters via AMPATRIN-1 or other asset.
Mandaliand
for Philip G. ELMARD
Attachment:
AMSCROLL Economic Intel Report, USC(an'd)
Distribution:
3-WH/C, w/att., USC
--
:
Late.
x 80779
8 053
1 CROSS REFERENCE TO
iD 201-120-58
CLASSIFICATION
SECRECS. COPY
MICROFILMED
OCT 2 0 1965
DOC. M'CRO. SER.
Intacrall
19-120-26 tet
DATE TYPED
7 Oct
DATE GASPATCHED
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-23449
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-132-49/3
par
OCT 12 1965
1
|

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_363.jpeg ---
14-00000
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATI
SECRET
PRO
FUSED
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
10
Chief, WH
INFO.
FROM
SUBJECT
0
Chief of Station, Caracas
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Er
AMSCROLL/European Shipping Organization
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED: Request comment
XX
MARKED FOR INDERING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
We attach herewith a reproduction of an article from the Caracas
newspaper El Universal of 10 September describing the organization
of a committee of European shippers to fight the discrimination
these shippers fancy they suffer in Latin America. We are curious
why such a group should be organized and to what purpose. Could this,
for example, be a reaction to the efforts to boycott ships that trade
with Cuba? The Station will appreciate Headquarters' comment if it
appears that this group may become important and if it is or will be
concerned with attempts to influence shipping to Cuba.
Rosa & March
for Philip G. ELMARD
Attachment:
article, USC(4)
Newspaper article,
Distribution:
-
OPCUP 1
Excludes from automatic
downgrimug and
Commiss
3- WH/C, w/att., USC CROSS REFERENCE TO
2- COS, Caracas, w/att;
2- C/WH, w/o/att.
USC
-
O
To out Poved
CLASSIFICATION
SECRCS COPY
19
DATE TYPED
9-120-76
7 Oct 65
DATE DISPATCHED
OCT 11 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-23448
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-132-49/3
Latt
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_362.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
- 3 -
inspected 104 cases containing art treasures during August 23, 24, and 25, in Milan,
Italy, identifying 45 pieces as their own.
1
Although 103 cases were only worth US$16,000, the contents of case #107 were said.
to be worth US$600,000. The first 103 cases delivered to Castro's "partner" Mah-
mood Mowlazadeh, contained religious and funeral pieces, but case #107, forwarded
from Switzerland, contained solid gold and silver objects.
Italian Customs have impounded Castro's "treasure".
-
8.- Castro's missions abroad "shaky" while rumors plague Island.- After the "defog
tions" of Luis Ricardo Alonso Ambassador to England - Gilberto R. Alemany -Trade
Councellor in Japan-, and several members of the Cuban "Music Hall" playing in Pa--
ris, the regime recalled its Ambassador to Prague, Armando Flores Ibarra, and the
following members of the Cuban Embassy in London: Maria Fernandez, Osmani Martines
Vazquez, Moises Dias, Mario Garcia, and Armando Lobeto.
-
Meanwhile, different rumors plagued Quba (many of them stemming from official state
ments): attempts on Castro's life, internal dissention resulting from the "ultima--
tum" given to militiamen to return weapons; new boatloads of Cuban refugees arriving
to Floridian shores; and Security Police Chief Valdes' statements zeroing-in against
"terrorism, sabotage, and resistance".
Econ. Int. Rep. recommends: "A Depression in Russia?" published by US NEWS & WORLD
REPORT in its September 13, 1965 issue. "Red Buying Snarled by Red Tape" by Miami
Herald-Los Angeles Time Wire, published in "THE MIAMI HERALD", September 17, 1965,
p.18-A.
Sources: The above information has been obtained from reliable sources, both from
Cuba and the Free World. For further details related to the above items
please address your correspondence to:
Economic Research Bureau
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
10 S.E. 9th Street
Miami, Fla., U.S.A.
:
1
5
Miami, October 1st., 1965.-
!
¡
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_364.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
t
1
s/cate#/
UFGA 23447
t
!
☑
USC Attachment; UFGA-23448
Armadores Europeos Constituyen,
Comité Contra Discriminaciones
que les Hacen en Latinoamérica
LONDRES, septiembre 3 (AFP)jlos gudernos a que pertenecon||
Los representantes de los and Amadores.
mador de les nueve perpanca, El Comité está compuesto por
malinas mercantes de Europa han representantes de lua compañílas
formado un Comite de acción maritimes cuyos advicios regu
contra la discriminación raciona-lares sirven la America dal Sur.
[lista practicada cada vez más, Se trata de compañías domicilia-
gún ellos, en América dei Suridas on Belgica, Francia, Alema.
en el terreno de los transportta,nia, Grecia, Italia, Paises Bajor,
maritimos.
(Naqueza, Suecia y Reino Unido,
¡El comunicado agrega que “cler-
La Camara de Transportas Mato número de palace. tanto dal
ritimos del Reino Unido preciso la costa occidental como de la
hay en un comunicado que este costa oriental de America del
Cunillé, cuya side se encuentralSar, practican discriminaciones
en Londres, tendrá por objeto fa-¡bajo una feina u ola,en la elec-
cilitar las consultas entre los acción de los pabellones y que
madores auropeos y coordinar sulolaos parecen emprender la adup-|:
acción a este respecto. El Co-ción de medidas de este género),
mité pondrà aridhiamo sus sci-jo de controles y rostriociones su-
Ividios consultivos a disposición del lamentarios".
-
EL UNIVERSAL
Sep 10/15
Shiphulders
CS COPY
$
and j
-
7_Oct_65_
L
19-120-26
5200"
LEWINNLI

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_360.jpeg ---
14-00000
2017
n
UR
USC Att. UFGA-23449
economic intelligence report
FROM THE U.R. ECONOMIC RESEARCH BUREAU
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
7 Oct 65
3P
OFFICE:
10 3. E. 9 St.
MAILING ADRESS
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
PHONE:
373 - 8033
VOL. I No.
F
1.- Cuba continues desperate attempts sell sugar.- The Cuban sugar monopoly, CUBA-
ZUCAR, on September 6 concluded a sale of 5,000 tons of raw sugar for October 1965
delivery to the Iranian sugar organization. The origin of this sugar was hidden in
that it was declared to have originated in the Caribbean, including Peru, excluding
Brasil. Market reports were correct in stating that the country of origin was in -
rigin
fact Cuba. The price agreed to was 18 pounds sterling per ton (C and F) less 5
shillings per ton to cover the expenses of the tender. This deal was engineered by
Westzucker of Dortmund, an organization also selling Cuban sugar to Jordan and which
wishes to keep its name out of these sales.
--
Another interesting development in Cuba's sugar selling activities during the month
of September was quoting sugar for future delivery at or under the London spot
price on the day the offer was made. In other words, Cuba is offering sugar under
the world market value.
Example of this were:
MICROFILMED
OCT 2 0 1965
Selling
Price
DOC. MICRO. SER.
Country
Date of Sale
Amount
Per Ton
(in Sterling)
Market
Price
Delivery
Iraq/Ceylon
Sept 9
10,000
Jordan
Sent 11
3,000
16
15-15-0
22.50
Nov '65
22.95
Nov
:
Scandinavia
Sept 7
10,000
18-2-0
24
Jan 166
Scandinavia
Sept 13
2,500
18
21.10
Oct
Sweden
Sept 9
10,000
16-16-0
22.50
Dec
Switzerland
Sept 9
10,000
18-10-0
United Kingdom
10,000
18-15-0
24
21.55
Jan '66
Sept
i
4' 104 * * *
It is difficult to explain this curious behavior in terms other than Cuba's desper-
ate need for foreign exchange. These sales at these prices can only result in a
net loss to Cuba due to Cuba's inefficient sugar production. This loss will be com
pounded should the present upward trend of world sugar futures continue (the New
York price for world sugar on Caribbean port basis has gone from $1.60 on September
1 to $2.10 on September 27).
2.- Free World Shipping drops 51%.- Twenty Western vessels called on Red Cuban ports
during the past month of August. The trend continues downward; the August 1963 to
tal was 24, and the one for August 1964 was 41, which means a decrease of 51%, when
August 1965 (20 vessels) is compared to August 1964.
Great Britain led the "maritime fifth columnists" with 11 vessels, followed by Leb-
anon, Greece, France, and Italy with 2 vessels each, and Cyprus with one.
Already 852 vessels are being kept out of the Red Cuba trade by its owners or opera
:s/cau#/ tors. The most recent example is "Rederiakticolatget Saly" of Marichamm, Finland,
UFGA 23449
CS COPY
19-120-26

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_361.jpeg ---
14-00000
- 2.
-
}
:
1
+
1
1
which firm withdrew 11,691-ton tanker, VALIY, and the other vessels it owns and/or
operates.
3.- "Tsavliris" privateers exposed.- TSAVLIRIS shipping firm, operating out of Lon
don and Piraeus, under the names of "Tsavliris Shipping", "Tsavliris Hellas Mari---
time", "Pancristo Shipping", "Waterloo Shipping", and "Trafalgar Shipping" is very
active in business with the Castro-Communist regime,
The
From a total of 17 vessols, TSAVLIRIS has been using 12 in the Red Cuba trade.
12 vessels are: FREE ENTERPRISE, FREE MERCHANT, NEW FOREST, NEW GATE, NEW GROVE,
NEW GLADE, NE. HEATH, NEW HILL, NEW LANE, NEW MEADOW, MUSWELL HILL, CLAIRE, FREE
TRÄDER, and FREE NAVIGATOR. TS.VLIRIS operates its vessels under British, Lebanese
or Haitian flags, this last action being illegal according to a July 6, 1965 Haitian
law. The FREE NAVIGATOR has changed its name seven times. The NEW HEATH has deliy
ered two shipments of Cuban sugar to Japan, which have not been accepted by Japanese
refineries, because stain and rust from vessel's hold has spoiled cargo. In mid-
August the Lebarise 7,260 ton SAN SPYRIDON had arrived in the United Kingdom with
1,600 tons of Cuban sugar spoiled by sea water.
TSAVILIRIS' vessels have made 50 trips to Red Cuba during the last two years.
4.- Cuban Management Boycott Committee receives support.- Reports reaching this
bureau indicate that the Cuban Management Boycott Committee has already received
several letters support from Free World Chambers of Commerce. Details are expected
to be known shortly.
->
5.- Free World dockworkers' boycott to receive boost.- The announcement of a Conti
nental Dockworkers Congress to be held in Venezuela during the first two weeks of
October confirm last month's report that an increase in boycott activities against
vessels flying the flags of countries still trading with Communist Cuba.
6.- Japanese Trade Mission gets "chilly" reception in Latin America due to Red Cuba
deals.- A Japanese Trade Mission, headed by fir. Kazue Kitagawa, President of "Sumi
tomo Electrical Industries" came under fire while touring Mexico, Venezuela, Brazil,
Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, and Peru. Latin Americans brought up matter that Japan
was indirectly financing subversion by providing Castro with an average of $1 mil--
lion dollars a month for the last 4 years. Japanese were told to choose between the
Red Cuban market and the Latin American market.
Some examples follow: article by L. Rojas Ospina in "Excelsior", Mexico, Sep. 4,
1965; in Brazil, a speech by Congressman Flaviano Riberiro dated Sep. 4, 1965, and
an article by Gustavo Corcao published in "Diario da Noticias", Rio de Janeiro, Sep.
2, 1965 issue, made the headlines. In Lima, Peru, a speech by Congressman Ricardo
Temoche made the local Japanese embassy respond with a vague statement of justifica
tion. In Chile, an editorial of "El Mercurio" stressed this point to Japanese visi
tors.
7.- Cuban exiles block Castro's attempt to sell "treasure".- Cuban exile Committee
for the Recovery of the artistic and Cultural Heritage of their country was able to
block Castro's attempt to sell art works and raise $2 million dollars. Cuban exiles
t

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_366.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
2
B.- Japan provides Castro of hard currency.
It is estimated that Japan provides Castro with 30% of its hard currency,
due to the proviously mentioned fact of a deficit in ita trade balance with Cuba.
The hard currency has averaged during the last four years the amount of U5$1 mil-- ·
lion a month, in the following manner (ostimates):
19621
1963:
19648
1965
US$ 14 million
12 million
8 million
14 million
Total: US$ 48 million.
The hard currency is used by Castro for two thingss
1.- Finance subversivo activition throughout Latin America.
2.- Pay short torn credits in European marketa, thus remaining in
business with countries other than Japan
C.- Japan is lending buyer of Cuban supar.-
:
Japan, together with Spain and Morocco, is one of the three loading Free
World buyers of Cuban sugar, although Japan is the country that has become Castro's
main source of foreign exchange.
F
1
'
!
1.- Cuban sugar purchased.
-
1959;
397,047 Ton.
;
1960s
210,272
1961:
325,539
1962:
522,727
2,699 Ton. (rofined)
15,148 n
It
19631
1
163,662
19641
328,609
1965:
300,000 (estimate).
2.- Japanese firms involved:
The leading buyers of Cuban sugar aros
Iwai & Co., Ltd.
Toyo Monka Kaisha, Ltd.
Kanematsu & Co., Ltd.
Moiji Trading Co., Ltd.
Okura Trading Co., Ltd.
Nozaki & Co., Ltd.
Sumitomo
Nichimen Co., Ltd.
1
T
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_365.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
5
1.
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
MEMORANDUM
70:
Mr. Androw C. McLellan
Inter-American Representative
AFL-CIO
Washington, D.C.
FROM: Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vázquez
Socrotary for Economic and
Professional Affairs,
Unidad Rovolucionaria,
Miami, Fla., U.F.A.
1
'
:
REF.: CONSIDERATIONS OF THE JAPAN-
CUBA TRADE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
THROUGHOUT LATIN AMERICA. *
i
1.- INTRODUCTION..
The Japanoso People, its businessmon, and its government have been able to
Fake Japa occupy a leading place among the industrial countries of the Free World.
In 1964, Japan was the loader in Free World shipbuilding, contributing 40% of the
tonnago; in the electronic field; Japan came in second; in steel production and
chemicala, Japan was able to occupy third place; and in automobile production, Ja-
1 was fourth, with 1.7 million vehiclos produced.
-
The froo-loving and democratic-oriented Cuban Poople are sympathetic with this
effort the Japanese People are making; an effort which is well known and admired
throughout the whole world. At the same time, the freo-loving and democratic-ori—
ented Cuban People -the ones within Cuba, and the ones living in exile- are aston--
iched to watch Japan vory much involved in trade relations with Communist Cuba, al-
though Japan is aware that by so doing it is directly aiding a tyranny, and at the
De tiom, providing this regime with the necessary funds to subvert its neighbors
throughout Latin America.
It should be pointed out that Japan, based on its concern for human rights
could very well consider that its present trade rolations with Communist Cuba are
completely negative, but this is not the only reason. Japan must be aware, that.
its trado rolutions with Communist Cuba will eventually, in a very near future,
jeopardizo Japan's trade relations with Latin America, and this is already begin--
ning to happen.
II. JAPAN-COMMUNIST CUBA TRADE RELATIONS.
A.- Trade Balance.
Japan has always had a deficit in its trade balance with Cuba, 1.8., not
only in its prosent trade relations, but also during its trade prior to the estab-
lichment of the Castro-Communist regimo.
->
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
TELEFONO FR 3-8033

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_367.jpeg ---
14-00000
D.- Other trudo operations.
-3-
Besides the raid sugar purchases, Japan is very active in its trade rela-
tions with Communist Cuba; trado rolations that totaled US$ 87 million for 1964,
which roprosented an increase of 240% over 1963.
Just to mention a few examplos, the names of some of the other Japanese
firms actively involved in trade operations with Communist Cuba follows
Mitouis through its "dummy", the Toho Bussan Kaisha.
C. Itoh: through its "dummy" the Kyodo Trading Co., Ltd.
Oki Electrics until recently through Mitsubishi Shoji Kaisha's "dummy #
the Moiwa Trading.
Toyo Rayon
Hitachi
Yawata Iron
Toyo Monka Kaisha: through the "dummy" Abe Trading Co.,
IJI.- JAPAN-LATIN AMERICA RELATIONS.-
A.- Jarania oconomic and trade interests in Latin America.
Ltd.
1.- Jupan has 77% of its foreign investment placed in Latin America.
2.- Proof of Japan's increasing interest in Latin Amorica has been the
visit of two Japanese Trade Missions to this Homisphere in less than one year
(Karch and September 1965).
3.- Japun has a deficit in its trade balance with Latin America, and al-
though the trado volume with Latin America omounted to US$ 433.4 million for the.-
rid January-July 1964, Japan lost UCS 174.8 million for mentioned period due to
the deficit in its trudo balance:
'
Jan-Jul. 1964: Japan exports: US$ 179.3 million
Jan-Jul. 1964: Japan imports: US$ 354.1 million
Jan-Jul, 1964: Deficit for Japan in its trade balance: US$ 174.8 million
4.- Breaking down Japan's trade balance with each Latin American country
the results are the following:
a.- Favorable trade balances: 8
i
Bolivia
;
Brazil
!
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Honduras i
Panamá
Vonezuela
VIR
1
f
}
th
}
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_368.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
i
1
b.- Unfavorable trade balances: 11
Argentina
Chile
Zcuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Haiti
Vexico
:
;
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
5.- The economic analyst has to conclude that the deficit in its overall
trado balance plus the importance of Latin America with regards to Japan'a foreign
investment will make Japan increase its interest in this Homisphero.
B. Consequencen of the Japan-Corundst Cuba trade throughout Latin America.
The consequences of the Japar-Communist Cuba trade are beginning to be
felt throughout Latin America, due to maintained "agit-prop" and cubversive activ-
ities by the Castro regime; financed, partially, with foreign exchange resulting
from its trade with Japan.
A highly illustrative example is the case of Venezuola.
1.- Venezuela: Trade Relations with Japan ard Communist attacks.
a.- Japan was able to obtain US8 133.5 million for the period 1958-
1963 from its favorable trade balance with Venezuela. The favorable result in tho
trade balance for the Jan-Jul 1964 pericò totaled USG 12.4 million.
Recently, C. ITOH and HITACHI closed important agreements with
the Venezuelan Phone Co., and C. ITOH was able to get an important contract with
"Corporation Venezolana de Petróleo".
b. On the other hand, Venezuela is considered by all experts a3 a
price target of Communism. The important arms caché discovered in Paraguana to--
wards the end of 1%3, prompt the Venezuelan government to accuse the Castro-Com-
munist régime during the IX Meeting of Foreign Affairs Ministers of the Americas,
on July 26, 1964. Since this incident, merous subversive activities have caused
great loses to both the People and the government of Venezuela, and to foreign
firms as well.
WaB
Less than a month ago, another important arms cacho was discove
ered in Los Teques, Miranda State; and once more the hard of Castro-Communism
traced and found.
c.- Then, when the situation is fully analyzed, it is a fact that
Venezuelan hard currency goes to Japan, and from there it goes to Castro, in order
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_37.jpeg ---
14-00000
.fi
"
K.W.MURPHY:fph
WH/COG/CA/EW
4163
PATCH 23 MAY 1967.
CABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION
ar 22
CONF
14/2968
MESSAGE TOMA
2321
30
TOTAL COPIES:
SECRET
ROUTING AND/OR INITIA.S. SEEN ST
INDEX
☑ NO INDEX
RID COPY
INFO
PILO
DESTROY
RETURN TO.
10
FILE IN CS FILE NO. 19-120-261
." WHO CA2 CA/CReg
10
BRANCH ☐ FILE RID
01/162 017
idate and time kładę
(elite]
[reference number)
(pleas
SECRET
TO
F
Žy 19412
Žų
CITE DIRECTOR
04241
7
7¬
SANTIAGO INTO JMWAVE
:TYPIC MHSPAWN AMSCROLL
AN 14
WH/C/CH
REFS:4 UFGA-27416 (20 APRIL 1967)
B. SANTIAGO 4230 (IN 58430)
EEST
ABSTRACT ✗
nis
HQS DEFERS TO STATION JUDGEMENT AS TO VALUE PROP PLAY IN CHILE
OF REP A PAPER. HOWEVER, WISH TO POINT OUT THAT PAPER QUOTES FIGURES
AND ARRIVES AT CONCLUSION ALREADY WELL KNOWN AND ACCEPTED BY
INDIVIDUALS KNOWLEDGEABLE OF SUGAR INDUSTRY.
END OF MESSAGE
by
WILLIAN V. BROE
C/WHD
RELEASING OFFICER
Defra
De/N:
EARL
COORDINATING OFFICERS
19-120-26
23 May 67
WILL TAMSON
AC/WH/COG
69OUP 1
Kaled from satamatie
gracing and
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICES
1
SECRET
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
COPY NO.
1
'

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_371.jpeg ---
14-00000
ORIG :
UNIT :
D. ROHLFING:alk'
WH/C/CA/EW
1225
EXT :
1 OCT 65
DATE :
JMWAVE
FROM: DIRECTOR
CONF:
1H/C
TO
MESSAGE FORM
TOTAL COPIESI 30
0° TROY ☐ RETURN TO BRANCH ☐ FILE 210
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
ROUTING
8
SECRET
1
INDEX
NO INDEX
2
200-120-58
FILE IN CS FILE NO.
☑
6
7.
MO
FI.TC
D
CARACAS
RID COPY/
8
INFO: VR, FILE
4 OCT 652 15 34E
MCA/CY CAZ, CA/PROP, WHY, FI
A/04
SIG CEN
E
FI/INT 2
INFO
WAVB
CARA
REF:
WAVE 6207 (IN 62333)*
CITE DIR
E
47534
1. NO OBJECTION PLANS OUTLINED PARA 2A REF..
2. AS BACKGROUND, RNLEPTOME (R) IN DIFFICULT POSITION VI8-A-VIS
CORREA SINCE R UNABLE BROADEN U.S. BOYCOTT ON SHAPS IN CUBAN TRADE
DUE CAVEATS IMPOSED ON AFL-CIO BY ODACID. ADDITIONALLY, LACK OF
FUNDING FROM AFL-CIO AND CONFLICT OF SCHEDULE WILL PRECLUDE
R ATTENDANCE AT REF CONVENTION.
WH/C Comment:
WILLIAM
WILLIAM V. BROE
C/WHD
RELEASING OFFICER
, END
, END OF MESSAGE
.UR
19-120-26
*Request approval send AMSCROLL and AMICE reps to
boycott convention.
DC/WH/C/CA
WH/C/MO
WH/3
Da
COORDINATING OFFICERS
JOHN
HART
DCWHD/C
4-2
SECRET
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PRONISITED.
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
COPY NO.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_372.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
i
TU
14150
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Athens
Chief, WH
Chief EE
CLAS
3 ECR T
FROM
Chief of Station, JUWAVE
į.
XX
PROCESSING
ALLOM
47579
NO NOTHING M
---
GLC
* tøse
CAN REINOK
ABSTRACT
MGM
BUBILET
AMSCROLL/Press Release and Jose Luis Galte
ACTION PEGU NED - REFERENGES
ACTION REQUIRED:
For Athens to determing
REFERENCE: WAVE-5789 (15 September 1965)
1. We attach under separate cover a copy of the press release
on Jose Luis Galbe that the reference indicated would be forthcoming
Also attached is a list of the newspapers and other organizations and
individuals that were mailed a copy of the release. The so-called
"Black List Firms" are those Greek firms that according to AMSCROLL
have had or do have commercial contacts with Cuba. Tho letters that
were mailed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and to the Home
Minister were, of course, originals and these two gentlemon were not
provided with a copy of the press release itself.
WAVE is anxious to keep the Galbe pot boiling and we welcome
any further suggestions to this end.
2.
2 att
PHILIP G. ELMARD
Attachments:
1. Press Release
2.
List
Distribution:
CROSS WERFENCE TO
m
3 - COS/Athens, w/atts, MCS COPY
USC
2- C/EE, w/atts, USC 2 cc w/als fund EE/K
2
-
C/WH, w/atts, USC
WH/C, #/atts, usd
SECRET
19-120-26
-19-133-49/3
DATE TYPED
24 Sep 65 SEP 30 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 23284
HEADQUARTERS FILË NUMBER
♦ 19-132-49/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_369.jpeg ---
14-00000
r
402
1
a
i
.5-
to aid terrorism against the Venezuelan People, the democratic government, its
businessmen, and even Japanese interests in that country. Isn't this a completo
ilogic operation?
2.- The Organization of American States (CIS).
On July 26, 1964, tho OAS, during the IX Meeting of Foroign Affairs
Ministers of the Amoricas, hold in Washington, D.C., condemned the Castro-Commu-
nist rogimo and requested from its member-countries, and from all free world coun-
tries outside the Hemisphere, to cease diplomatic and trado relations with Cuba.
3.- The Inter-American Workers Creanimation (ORIT).
During its VI Continental Congress, held in Mexico City, on February
6, 1965, recommended the maritimo boycott which was already in progress under the
leadership of the Vonozuolan dockworkers.
Rocontly, after 17 vessels have suffered tho boycott, a statoment,
made by international labor leaders during the IV Congress of Venozuelan Dockwork-
ers, held in Caracas from October 9 to October 13, 1965, reaffirmed the boycott.
Japanese vescola have been boycotted due to this defensive measure of the workers
of this Homisphere.
4.- The_Management Boycott.
The Chamber of Commerce of the Americas, during its XV Annual Conven-
tion hold in Miami, Fla., U.S.A., adopted a resolution on June 16, 1965, along the
same lines of the OAS and ORIT recommendations. Since then, a Management Boycott
Committee has been formed, and already about three dozens of Latin American Cham-
bers of commerce support this campaign.
5.- Public Opinion.
The Japanese Trade Mission that toured Latin America left behind the
following reaction:
a.- Moxico: Article "América Latina, Japón y Castro" by doctor Loo- .
poldo Rojas Ospiña, published by "Excelsior" on September 4, 1965.
b.- Brazil: Article "Japan Halps Fidel Castro" by Gustavo Corcao,
published by "Diario de Noticias", on September 2, 1965.
Article "Japan and Latin America" by Mircea Buescu, published by
Diaric de Noticias", on September 9, 1965.
c.- Peru: Congressman Ricardo Temoche Benitez pointed out Japan's it-
titude, due to its trade relations with Communist Cuba during a speech made in Con
gress on September 1st., 1965. Congressman Tezocho's statements received ample
coverage in the local press and were object of an "Agence France Presse" wiro.
d.- Chile: The leading "El l'arcurio" newspaper devoted one of its
editorial articles during September 1965 to point out the same thing.
->
11
55

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_370.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
1
-
c.- Colombia: Mr. José R. Morcado, Procident of the Confederation of
Colombian Workers (CTC) delivered a memorandum to His Excellency the Japaneco Amb-
sador to Colombia, dated October 29, 1965 on the same subject.
An increase of this reaction may be expected.
1. CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
A.- Conclusions:
1.- Japan is presently aiding Castro-Communism.
2.- Japan is highly dependent of Latin Amorica in order to achieve further
economic prosperity.
3.- The Japan-Communist Cuba trade and the Japan-Latin America trade are
✓ in contradiction.
4.- Japan may suffer considerable losses in its Latin American markets if
trade relations with Communist Cuba continue.
B.- Suggestions:
1.- The benefits derived from Cuban sugar purchases are no longer availa-
ble to Japan, because, due to the drop of prices in the World Sugar Market, Castro
cannot continue to give firms privileges that resulted of high prices, with enough
margin to maneuver and still receive benefits. After prices hitting a post-World
Mar II low, Castro has no margin for those operations.
2.- Japan could very well substitute its purchases of Cuban sugar by in-
creasing its purchases to Taiwan and Australia, and even botter, to Latin American
countries like Brazil, the Dominican Republic, and Peru, as it used to do previous
to the concentration of dealings with Castro-Communism. Purchasing more sugar from
democratic Latin American would improve Japan's image and at the same time it would
eliminate its present trade dangers due to its dealings with Cuba.
Miami, Fla., U.S.A., November 10, 1965.
* Copy of Memorandum sent to all Japanese Ambassadors to Latin America
attending November-mmeting in Tokyo.-
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_374.jpeg ---
14-00000
-2-
80
young spies are given a two-year course at a special Ministry of the In
terior school to get them ready. The Minister of the Interior goes
far as to favor young boys from low social levels to work as agents in-
embassies. He dresses them up, teaches them a few things, gives them a
gun and sends them overseas. the system is diabolic, but it works.
These boys, whom they have made into powerful men, are proving to be
the most fanatical agents. They never defect". "The two-year course
on spying, Alemany said, includes a "little of everything, even elemen-
tary English. The graduates are assigned to Cuban embassies as untitl-
ed attaches"
"Mr. Alemany has further told us his workmates in UNIDAD REVOLUCIO
NARIA, that he has knowledge of the Galbe case, and that he knows the
Cuban Charge in Athens to be just the type of person of which he speaks
in his interview --a définitely undesirable sort by any standard. He
adds that, while in Japan, Galbe's preposterous behaviour was widely co
mmented within Tokyo diplomatic circles. The unanimous impressi on was
one of shock and concern, and it was expected that the Greek Government
would react promptly and energetically."
"We all know, Cubans and Greeks alike, that Galbe is no credit to -
the Cuban people and is an insult to the Greek nation. Thus, we write
with the thought that the facts forwarded in this letter will further
unmask Galbe and show what he really is",
Sincerely,
-
Miami, September 16, 1965
Ref: 195
Dr. Mario Seiglie Montoro
Secretary General
:
i
!
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_373.jpeg ---
14-00000
press release
A PRESS SERVICE FROM
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
103 E. St.
MAILING ADDRT SS
Bc. 1940
Miami, Florida
PHONE:
373 - 8033
.
U.R. LETTER TO GREEK GOVERNMENT URGES GALBE OUSTER
Cases of real diplomats Alemany and Alon
30 cited as contract to preposterous be-
haviour of the gangster Galbe.-
Here is text of letter sent to the Foreign Affairs and Interior Mi
nisters of Greece:
Excellency:
-
"You may recall that, in mid-May this year, the Communist Cuban
Charge d'Affaires in Athens, Jose Luis Galbe, was the object of world
attention after he shot a Greek bus driver over a trivial traffic argu-
ment near the town of Thermopylae. Newspapers throughout the world car
ried the story and it would not be exaggerated to label the incident as
an international scandal -one which may be said to have damaged Hellen-
ic dignity to the same extent to which the Castro regime ignores it by
accrediting gangsters such as Galbe as its diplomatic representatives
before the Greek people."
--
-
"On that occasion, we wrote the Greek government calling their at-
tention to the need to save the honor of Greece by severing all ties
diplomatic and commercial-- with the Red government of Cuba. At that
time, we warned that the gangster Galbe was typical of the new promotion
of Red Cuban "diplomats" --mostly undesirable Communists trained to per
form tasks of espionage and agitation-- and substantiated our assertion
with a quote from Odon Alvarez de la Campa, a defecting Cuban diplomat-
who had charged Galbe by name during a press conference in Madrid."
"Today, two new defections from the Cuban Foreign Service prompt us
to re-open the Galbe case. We refer to those of Mssrs. Gilberto R. Ale
many Vilar, until recently, Trade Counseler to the Cuban Embassy in To-
kyo, and Luis Ricardo Alonso Fernandez, until recently, Cuban Ambassador
to Great Britain.
-
"Both former diplomats had always been regarded as competent, seri
ous men even by us, the relentless opposers of the Castro-Communist ty-
ranny. Before he took office as Cuban Ambassador to the United kingdom
in 1963, Luis R. Alonso Fernandes had also performed ambassadorial du
ties in Peru and Norway. A scholarly, well-mannered man, he is well re
membered by all who knew him in his diplomatic office, even if they may
have disapproved of the totalitarian regime that he represented. Even-
tually, he became disenchanted with Communism and publicly resigned his
post in London only a few days ago. (In connection with Mr. Alonso's re
signation, the Greek newspaper "\radyni", in its September 6 issue, won
ders precisely why Red Cuban Ambassador Galbe has not been ousted yet)."
"Gilberto R. Alemany, an equally able and well-bred trade specia
list, held his Counselor's position for three years in Tokyo. His re-
cognition of the true nature of the Red Cuban government led him to de-
fect secretly and become our own secret agent in Japan. Late last mon-
th, after fulfilling his dangerous mission, he made his feelings public
in Miami."
"As you can see, those decent people, who are still active in Cas-
tro's diplomatic corps cannot stand it for a long time. These new' de-
fections show that the few that remain are abandoning the sinking ship
to the "new wave" of Castroite diplomats --gangsters, spies and agita-
tors in Galbe's fashion."
"But there is more: shortly after his defection, in an interview
with a leading Miami newspaper, Mr. Alemany made statements that con--
firm our assertions to this respect. The following are quotes from
this interview:
-
"" The Fidel Castro government chooses unemployed, uneducated young
men to be trained and assigned to Cuban embassies abroad as spies. The at
W #1
AFGA 23284
CS COPY
19-120-26 par
719-732-4913

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_378.jpeg ---
14-00000
I
3'.
..
7
:
**
:
I
1
I
1
1
I
The Editer
HIMERISSIA
Atnons, Greece.
Mr. H. Vlachou
Editor,
KATHIMERINI
Athons, Greece.
The Editor
Edit
MESSAGER D'ATHENS
Athens,
Greece.
Mr. Ch. Lambrakis
Editor,
TA NEA
Athens, Greece.
Mr. A. Demakos
Editor
TO-VIMA
Athens, Greece.
Mr. L. Bortolos
Director,
VRADYNI
Athons, Greece.
Mr. Dimitrios Dzoulakis
8 Seizani Stz.
Imittos
Athona, Greece.
The Editor
"The Atlantis"
521 W. 23rd St.,
New York 11, N.Y.
The Editor
"National Herald"
140 W - 26 St.,
New York 1, N.Y.
The Journal of Commerce
11 Tsami Karatassou St.,
Makriyanni
Athens, Greece.
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_376.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
-2-
So
young spies are given a two-year course at a special Ministry of the In
terior school to get them ready. The Minister of the Interior goes
far as to favor young boys from low social levels to work as agents in-
embassies. He dresses them up
He dresses them up, teaches them a few things, gives them a
gun and sends them overseas. The system is diabolic, but it works.
These boys, whom they have made into powerful men, are proving to be
the most fanatical agents. They never defect". "The two-year course
on spying, Alemany said, includes a "little of everything, even elemen-
tary Eng
The graduates are assigned to Cuban embassies as untitl-
ed attaches",
"Mr. Alemany has further told us his workmates in UNIDAD REVOLUCIO
NARIA, that he has knowledge of the Galbe case, and that he knows the
Cuban Charge in Athens to be just the type of person of which he speaks
in his interview --a definitely undesirable sort by any standard. He
adds that, while in Japan, Galbe's preposterous behaviour was widely co
mmented within Tokyo diplomatic circles. The unanimous impression was
one of shock and concern, and it was expected that the Greek Government
would react promptly and energetically,
-
"We all know, Cubans and Greeks alike, that Galbe is no credit to -
the Cuban people and is an insult to the Greek nation. Thus, we write
with the thought that the facts forwarded in this letter will further
unmask Galbe and show what he really is",
Sincerely,
-
I
Miami, September 16, 1965
Ref: 195
Dr. Mario Seiglie Montoro
Secretary General
:
:
1
1
:
411
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_375.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
press release
A PRESS SERVICE FROM
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U R.)
OFFIC
2
10 S E. 9 St.
MAILING ADDRE
Box 39 40
Miami, Florido
PHONE:
373 - A033
H.R. LETTER TO GREEK GOVERNMENT URGES GALBE CUSTER
Casca of real diplomats Alemany and Alon
so cited as contrast to preposterous be
haviour of the gangster Calbe.
Here is text of letter sent to the Foreign Affairs and Interior Mi
nisters of Greece:
Excellency:
-
"You may recall that, in mid-May this year, the Communist Cuban
Charge d'Affaires in Athons, Jose Luis Galbe, was the object of world
attention after he shot a Greek bus driver over a trivial traffic argu-
ment near the town of Thermopylae. Newspapers throughout the world car
ried the story and it would not be exaggerated to label the incident as
an international scandal -one which may be said to have damaged Hellen-
ic dignity to the same extent to which the Castro regime ignores it by
accrediting gangsters such as Galbe as its diplomatic representatives
before the Greek people."
1 "On that occasion, we wrote the Greek government calling their at-
-
tention to the need to save the honor of Greece by severing all tics
diplomatic and commercial-- with the Red government of Cuba. At that
time, we warned that the gangster Galbe was typical of the new promotion
of Red Cuban "diplomats" --mostly undesirable Communists trained to per
form tasks of espionage and agitation-- and substantiated our asserti on
with a quote from Odon Alvarez de la Campa, a defecting Cuban diplomat-
who had charged Galbe by name during a press conference in Madrid."
"Today, two new defections from the Cuban Foreign Service prompt us
to re-open the Galbe case. We refer to those of Mssrs. Gilberto R. Ale
many Vilar, until recently, Trade Counseler to the Cuban Embassy in To-
kyo and Luis Ricardo Alonso Fernandez, until recently, Cuban Ambassador
to Great Britain.
"Both former diplomats had always been regarded as competent, seri
ous men even by us, the relentless opposers of the Castro-Communist ty-
ranny. Before he took office as Cuban Ambassador to the United kingdom
in 1963, Luis R. Alonso Fernandez had also performed ambassadorial du
ties in Feru and Norway. A scholarly, well-mannered man, he is well re
membered by all who knew him in his diplomatic office, even if they may
have disapproved of the totalitarian regime that he represented. Even-
tually, he became disenchanted with Communism and publicly resigned his
post in London only a few days ago. (In connection with Mr. Alonso's re
signation, the Greek newspaper "Vradyni", in its September 6 issue, won
ders precisely why Red Cuban Ambassador Galbe has not been ousted yet)."
"Gilberto R. Alemany, an equally able and well-bred trade specia
list, held his Counselor's position for three years in Tokyo. His re
cognition of the true nature of the Red Cuban government led him to de-
fect secretly and become our own secret agent in Japan. Late last mon-
th, after fulfilling his dangerous mission, he made his feelings public
in Miami."
"As you can see, those decent people, who are still active in Cas-
tro's diplomatic corps cannot stand it for a long time. These new de-
fections show that the few that remain are abandoning the sinking ship
to the "new wave" of Castroite diplomats --gangsters, spies and agita-
tors in Galbe's fashion."
-
"But there is more: shortly after his defection, in an interview
with a leading Miami newspaper, Mr. Alemany made statements that con--
firm our assertions to this respect. The following are quotes from
this interview:
-
-
" The Fidel Castro government chooses unemployed, uneducated young
men to be trained and assigned to Cuban embassies abroad as spies. The

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_377.jpeg ---
14-00000
__
EZWSPAPERS:
Hr. R. Grigoriadis
Editor,
ACROPOLIS
Athens, Greece,
Editore
AIOGEVMATINI
Athens,
Greece.
The Editor
ATHENAR KURIER
Athens,
Greeco.
Mr. G. Skouras
Editor,
ATHENS DAILY FOST
Athens, Greece.
Mr. John Horn
Editor.
ATHENS NEWS
Athens, Greece.
Mr. E. Baklatzie
Editor,
ATHINAIKI
Athens, Greece,
Mr. P. Kokkas
Editor,
XLEFTHERIA
Athens, Greece.
The Editor
ESTHERINOS THYPOS
Athens, Greece.
Ath. Paraschos
Editor,
ATHNIKOS KIRYX
Athens, Greece.
The Editor
ESTHEIA
Athens, Greece.
Mr. C. Economidis
Editor.
ETHNOS
Athens, Greece,
124 10
So AM. n
i
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_38.jpeg ---
1.
I'
14-00000
INDEX) ☐ YES ☐ No
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X REF TO FILE NO.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
TOTAL COPITA
FILE RID ALT, To Braxon ☐
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
30
ACTION-
37
VRVI
T
PEPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
INFO
WHICH & RID COPY
☑
ADVANCE COPY
☐ ☐
| SLOTTED ☐ TOE
TIME
FILE, VE, Wiles, ADOP, C1/OPS, C1/102, C1/0A, FI, FI/INTZ,
SECRET 161529Z CITE JMWAVE 7202
DIRECTOR
TYPIC-MHVIPER
REF:
RIO DE JANEIRO 375,6'1" 67134,
IN SELECTING INFO REQUESTED PARA 2 REF ON
NEGATIVE ASPECTS OF TRADING WITH CUBA HQS MAY WISH
CONSIDER (ANSCROLL SERIES OF ECONOMIC REPORTS ESPECIALLY
VCL II NO. 205 3 MARCH AND VOL II NO. 5 OF 19 DECEMBER
WHICH DISCUSS IN DETAIL SUGAR FRODUCTION PROBLEMS.
ALSO STATEMENTS TO PRESS BY DEFECTORS SUCH AS AMRIVER-1,
AMRAIN-1 AND AMSNAKE-1 MAY BE HELOPUL. IF DESIRED
JMWAVE CAN POUCH THIS MATERIAL TO RIO.
SECRET
:
BT
16 MAY 67 IN 68222
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_379.jpeg ---
14-00000
Un
BLACK LIST FIRMS:
L
Konstantinos Pinskoibakis
6 Polytechnoiou St.,
Athens,
Greece,
Icannis Triantafyllis
9 Patission St..
Athers, Greece,
Nikolaos Rombapas and Son
1 Streit St..
Athens, Greece.
Dimitriades Textile Co.,.
27 Praxitelous St.,
Athens, Greece.
Solcu Sason
c/o Transstekom
9 Aristeidou St.,
Athens, Greece,
New Agrex Co..
28 Kapodistrious St.,
Athens, Greece,
Mecsinezis and Co.,
1 Karysti St.,
Athens, Greece,
Vasilics Eleisiaris
28 Emmenuel Benaki St..
Athens, Greece.
Fotis Raptis
91 Adaminias St.,
Athens, Greece.
Franco Shipping Agency
65 Patission St.,
Athens, Greece,
Karagiannidis Travel Agency
11 Akti Miaduli St.,
Athens, Greece.
Esta Maritimo Agency
3 Dimitrio Counari St.,
Piraeus, Gresce.
Michael Karageorgis
:
Plateia Loudovikous,
Piraeus, Greece,
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_380.jpeg ---
1
:
14-00000
***
06.n.
:
Helenic Shipyards
4 Akademias St.,
Athers,
Greece.
Livanos Company
Megaron Typaldou
Piraeus,
Greece.
t
GOVERNMENT:
Greek Bloration
United Nations
United Nations Bldg.,
Now York City, N.Y.
Chamber of Deputies
House of Parliament
Athens, Greece.
F.E. Arbassador of Greece
Greek Arbassy
Washington, D.C.
4
7
:
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_382.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
✓
The Editor
HIMERISSIA
Athens, Greece.
Mr. H. Vlachou
Editor,
KATHIMERINI
Athons, Greece,
The Editor
MESSAGER D'ATHENS
Athens,
Greece.
Mr. Ch. Lambrakie
Editor,
TA NEA
Athens, Greece.
Mr. A. Domakos
Editor.
TO VIKA
Athens, Greece.
Mr. L. Bortolos
Director,
VRADYNI
Athons, Greece,
Hr. Dimitrios Droulakis
.8 Seizani Sts.
Imittos
Athens, Greece.
The Editor
"The Atlantis"
521 W. 23rd St.
New York 11, N.T.
The Editor
"National Herald'
140 - 26 St.,
W
New York 1, N.Y.
The Journal of Commerce
11 Teami Karatasson St.
Makriyanni
Athens, Greece.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_381.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
1.
NEWSPAPERS:
Mr. S. Grigoriadis
Editor,
ACROPOLIS
Athens, Greece,
Editore
APOGEVATINI
Athons,
Greece, 1
The Editor
ATHENAR KURIER,
Athens,
Greece.
Mr. G. Skouras
Editor,
ATHENS DAILY POST
Athons, Greece,
Mr. John Horn
Editor.
ATIDENS NEWS
Athens, Greece..
Mr. E. Boklatzis
Editor,
ATHINAIKI
Athens, Greece,
Mr. P. Kokkas
Editor.
XLEFTHERIA
Athens, Greece.
The Editor
ESTHERINOS THYPOS
Athens, Greece.
Ath. Paraschos
Editor,
ATHNIKOS KIRYX
Athens, Greece.
The Editor
ESTHEIA
Athens, Greece,
Mr. C. Economidi
Editor,'
ETHEDS
Athens, Greece,
1.
19-120-26
SC AM. #2
50
A

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_385.jpeg ---
14-00000
(
4. ☐ Yes ☐
SIW TO FIVE NO
ER TO FILE NO.
.
LF DID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
STROY ☐ $10.
.OM
C WAVE
WH/C 8
CLASS: LD MESSAGE
26.
SECRET
PERSO 'UNIT NOTI
TOTAL COP (3
Fall Cimen
ADVANCE cort
RID COPY ☐
:
"
FILE VR, FL, FIINTZ, FilDY
SFC RET 212122Z
DIP CITE WAVE 5042
TYPIC ZRPERUSAL
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
-
FP-
SL
MO
CA
Ew
BR-RET•
UNIT
t
21 SEP 65 IN 56628
RF 6/27339-65, 17 SEP
WISH USE VIA MSCROLL FLEMENTS OF REF PEPORT ON CUPAN SCAR
ACTIVITIES.
AS PES WOULD USE END OF PARA 7 DESCRIPING CLOSING OF
SALE AND COUNTRY OF ORIGIN SPLCULATION COMBINED WITH PARENTHETICAL
11
INFCEMATION ON PARA 2 PE IRANIAN !! SEP TENDER.
WESTZUCKER (SEE PAPA AS CO-PETWEEN THIS DEAL.
)
WOULD THEN EXPOSE
WOULD NOT USE
SPECIFICS OF OFFERS AND COUVIER-OFFERS IN ORDER PROTECT SOURCE.
PLEASE ADVISE.
CRET
CF# 5542 0/27839-65 17 SEP AMSCROLL CUTAN 73 IONIAN 11 SEP
WECTZUCKER 6 CO-PFTWEEN NOT USE COUNTER-OFFERT
SECRET
PT
2
☑
☐
=

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_386.jpeg ---
14-00000
PROCESSING
IP
INFO
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
CLASSIFICATICA
SECRET
FRO
POSED
C/FE; COS, Tokyo; COS, Mexico; COS, Caracas
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/AMWASP/AMSCROLL/Operational
0
AMSCROLL Report of AMWASP-1 Defection
ACTION REQUIRLO · REFERENCES
REF:
WAVE 5450, 31 August 1965
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARKED FOR INGEFING
x
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
MEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFI
MICROFILMED
SEP 23 1965
DOC. MICRO. SER.
16 Subject report prepared by AMSCROLL presents a roundup of
preparatory activities and subsequent publicity of the AMWASP-1
defection as sponsored by the AMSCROLL organization. Due to the
number of MHSPAWN assets which interplayed in the particular opera-
tion, the report is attached under separate cover No. 1 in true
names and identities without reference to the MHSPAWN assets involved.
2, Undor separate cover attachment No. 2 contains samples of
written propaganda and an AMSCROLL mailing list.
3.
Also forwarded under separate cover, attachment No. 3, are
the Spanish and English tapos of the AMWASP/1 statement."
Desibia & Monster
PHILIP G. ELMARD
Attachments:
1.
2.
3.
Report, u/sc 20
Prop and Mailing List, u/scand
Tapes, u/scand
Distribution:
3- WH/C, w/attachs
322222
}
Wall
C/FE, w/No.1 attach accel W
-
WH, W/No. 1 attach 2 cc
-
-
COS, Tokyo, w/No. 1 attach
-
COS, Mexico, W/No. 1 attach
-
COS, Caracas, W/No. 1 attach
(S COPY
CROSS REFERENCE TO
B- 201-333974
CLASSIFICATION
To OUT Pouch
(* 1
188
SECRET
19
DATE TYPED
120-26
10 Sept 65
DISPATCH
SEP 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
LFGX - 53
UFGA 23,072.
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_384.jpeg ---
14-00000
'
d>
Holenic Shipyards
4 Akademias St.,
A thone
Greece.
Livanos Company
Mogaron Typaldou
Piraeus
Greece.
GOVERNMENT:
Greak Delegation
United Nations
United Nations Bldg.,
Now York City, N.Y.
Chamber of Dopaties
House of Parliament
Athens, Greece.
H.E. Ambassador of Greece
Grook Embassy
Washington, D.C.
"
1.
t
A
tone

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_383.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
:
1
BLACK LIST PRIE:
Kematantinos Pantikoloakis
6 Polytechnoiou St.,
Athens,
Greece.
Temenic Triantafyllis
7 Fetission St..
Athens, Greece,
Nikolaon Rombapas and Son
1 Etroit St.,
Athens, Greece.
Dinitriades Textile Co.,
27 Praxitolous St.,
Athens, Greece.
Solo Sason
c/o Trenkatokom
9 Aristoidou St.,
Athens, Grence.
Lea Dorset Co.
28 Zepedistrious St...
Athens, Greece.
Meesinozis and Co.,
1 Karyeti St.,
Athens, Greece,
Tecilies Eleisiaris
28 Zamanuel Benaki St.,
Athens, Greece,
Fotie Reptin
1 £daminias St.,
Athens, Greece.
Franco Shipping Agency to
65 Patission St.,
Athens, Greece,
Zaregionnidis Travel Agency
11 Akti Kiaduli St.,
Athens, Greece.
Este Maritime Agency
3 Dimitric Coumari St
Piraeus, Greece.
Michael Karageorgis
Plateia Loudovikous.
Pirsens, Greece.
"
1.
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_387.jpeg ---
14-00000
MICROFILMID
SEP 23 1905
-
DOC. MICRO. BER.
SECRET
3P
M
Separate Cover Attachment to
No. 1 to
UFGA 23079-
UFGY_00054
Unidad Revolucionaria Memorandum
The following steps have been taken in the defection and subsequent
publicity of Gilberto Alemany, Trade Counselor of the Cuban Embassy in
Tokyo, Japan;”
->>
1. A press conference was held on August 27th at 7 p.m. in the
Biscayne Room of the McAllister Hotel, which was attended by most of the
members of the Miami area press, (approximately 50 persons in total) in
response to Unidad Revolucionaria (UR) invitation. Mr. Alemany read a
statement prepared by him and by members of the UR, which was also
mimeographed and distributed both in English and Spanish to the persons
present at the Conference. Photos of the event were taken, to be later ·
published in the UR publications. A recording of the proceedings was
made.
2. Coverage by the press included the following items:
a. A front-page article by Mary Louise Wilkinson in the
Miami News of August 28th. (Both editions).
August 28th.
b. An article by Don Bohning in the Miami Herald of
c. A front-page story in the "Diario de las Americas"
of August 29th by Benjamin de la Vega,
d. An editorial in the Miami News of August 30th,
e. An article by Humberto Medrano in the "Diario de la
Americas" of September 1st.
fö A story in the "El Universal" of Caracas, Venezuela,
of September 1st,
g. TV stations Channel 4 and Channel 7 broadcast filmed
stories of the press conference on August 27th and 28th,
h. Radio stations WRUL and Radio Americas taped interviews
with Mr. Alemany on August 31st,
on August 31st,
Radio program "La Voz de Cuba" also taped an interview
j. A.I.P. interviewed Mr. Alemany (Jose M. Illan) on
September 1st for a cover story in that publication", B
k The "Voice of America" taped an interview on September
2nd (Manolo de la Torre).
GS COPY
19-120-26
s/e at. 14FGX-00054
12 Mr. Al Burt, Latin editor of the "Miami Herald",
interviewed Mr. Alemany on September 2nd for a subsequent story.
1
:
:
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_388.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
m Radio Tropical of Caracas, Venezuela also broadcast
the story on September 1st.
addresses:
3.
Mr. Alemany's defection statement was sent to the following
1
a On August 28 and 31, to the attached list of Japanese
newspapers in Tokyo. (
b
->>
On August 31st, to 110 Japanese firms on the UR blacklist.
C. On September 1st, to the UR economic mailing list in
the United States and Canada, which includes sugar brokers, business
concerns, economic publications such as "Journal of Commerce", etc.
Auti
do On September 2nd, the Spanish version was sent to 148
addresses in Spain, which includes Spanish firms, newspapers and
government offices.
To 100 Latin American newspapers and Japanese embassies,
including the Japanese ombassy in Washington.
To 150 shipping firms in the United States and Canada,
g. To economic publications throughout Europe,
htt
To the members of the Japanese Trade Mission which
toured Latin America during March, with personal letters from Dr. Cavada"
The UR is currently completing the mailings to the
other addresses on its blacklist in other countries.
4 The UR has prepared a summary of Alemany's original
statement which is being sent to the addresses not yet covered.
(Copy attached)
53 Dr. Rivas-Vasquez of the UR propaganda section contacted
Mr. Martin Correa, Secretary General of the Venezuelan Dockworkers for
further steps in that area. Rivas-Vasquez also spoke to Mr. Salvador
Romani, of the Movimiento Anti-Comunista Femenino de Venezuela, and Mr.
Carlos Andres Perez, former Venezuelan Cabinet member and future presidential
candidate, Mr. Martin Correa also requested, and was granted, a private
interview with Mr. Alemany on Saturday, August 28, which was also attended
by Dr. Seiglie, president of the UR.
6. Additional follow-up action is listed below:
a. Mr. Enrique Lindner, the UR delegate in Washington, D.C.,
was instructed to try to get Mr. Alemany's statement into a leading
national magazine or publication, for which he was sent copies plus photostats
of the confidential documents brought by Mr. Alemany during his press
conference. Mr. Lindner was hopeful of arranging insertion of the
statement in the magazine "U.S. News and World Report."
SECRET
d
I
+
}
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_389.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
SECRET
b. The NBC television program, "The Today Show", was
approached and offered an interview with Mr. Alemany through Mr. Paul
Cuningham, associato producer of that program,
c. Mr. Alomany has drawn up a plan which includes the
writing of personal letters by him to a number of directors of Japanese
firms with which he dealt in Tokyo.
d. Mr. Jose Alvarez Diaz, a trade specialist and Cuban
economics professor at the University of Miami is preparing an analysis
of Mr. Alemany's defection statomont, which he will try to have
publishod in a leading economic publication
e. An attempt is being made to arrange for a tolevision
panel show on one of the local stations"
t
SECRET
:
3
I
+
i
}
I
:
t
'

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_39.jpeg ---
14-00000
INDENT ☐ YESU ☐ m
CLASSIFY TO FILE AS.
X-RER TO FILE NO. _
Loca
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO SP Agca, Ɑ,
DISTRUS ☐ SIG.
ACTION
INFU
zel
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
Fr
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
WHC 3-8 / RID COPY
✓
TOTAL COPIES
2
ADVANCE CUPY
-
☐ ☐ ☐
FILE, V.R, WH-8 CA. 2, CAlikep, FI
WAVE
SECRET 1221512 CITE JIWAVE 7155
DIRECTOR FAIL DE JANEIRO, SAU PAULO
TYPIC MACHAN ADRULL AMOT
AN11)
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TIME
12 MAY 67 IN 66356
164/JFGC
REF JOWAVE 7125 CN65400)
STORY CASED UPON STUDY DISCUSSER WEF PUBLISHED
NIANI HERALD 12 MAY ENTITLED "SUGAR MANVEST IN CUBA
MAY BE DEST CIACE '61. ALSO AP FILES STORY WITH
ITS NEW YORK OFFICE IDENTIFIED AS PL759PED MAY 11.
AIRMAILING ADDRESSEES BOTH ACCOUNTS.
SECRET
SECRET
GT
19-120-26
12 May
1967
$

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_391.jpeg ---
14-00000
1.
SECRET _
IN 20224 PAGE 2
C. COSTS OF INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF CONVENTION WILL TOTAL
APPROX $12,000, IN ORDER DEFRAY ROUND-TRIP TRAVEL AND LODGING
EXPENSES 25-30 INTERNATIONAL DELEGATES, RADIO/TV COVERAGE, AND COSTS
OF SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS, PRESS, ETC.
2. CORREA PLANS ATTEMPT RAISE PORTION NECESSARY FUNDS FOR
CONVENTION FROM LOCAL VEN SOURCES SUCH AS CTV, AD, AND SPECIAL
LOTTERY AND FUNDRAISING CAMPAIGN AMONG VEN/CUBAN EXILE PUBLIC.
SIMILARLY, AMICE AND AMSCROLL HAVE BEEN ASKED ATTEMPT RAISE PARTIAL
FUNDS BY PUBLIC FUNDRAISING CAMPAIGN IN JMWAVE EXILE COMMUNITY.
3 ACCORDING AMICE, CORREA HAS OBTAINED RNBEING'S AND RNLEPTOME'S
"
APPROVAL RE PARA 1 ABOVE PLANS, WHILE NO COMMITMENTS OF CLOSE
COLLABORATION OR FINANCIAL SUPPORT FORTHCOMING FROM EITHER,
RNLEPTOME WILLING PARTICIPATE IN CONVENTION AND PLANS ARRIVE
CARACAS 7 OCT。
4. IN VIEW NEED INTRODUCE MORE COORDINATED HEMISPHERE EFFORTS
AND COMMON VITALITY IN BOYCOTT CAMPAIGN, ABOVE MEETING WOULD APPEAR
ABLE SERVE USEFUL PURPOSE STIMULATE MHVIPER PROGRAM. IT ALSO MAY
BE POSSIBLE GAIN ADDITIONAL MHSPAWN MILEAGE DUE ITS TIMELINESS AND
TIE-IN RECENT AMWASP-1 DEFECTION AND CURRENT HEMISPHERE TOUR
JAPANESE TRADE DELEGATION.
STATION FEELS CONCENTRATION OF CUBAN
_ SECRET ✗
;
:
"
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_392.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
$
SEOKET.
!
M syday live a
EXILE SUPPORT AT MEETING MAY DETRACI 115 OVERALL IMPACT AND
•
EFFECTIVENESS, THUS PREFERABLE ST.MULATE MORE APPROPRIATE SUPPORT
FROM AMONG THOSE ORGS WITHIN CUBAN BOYCOTT/IPHOODCAP FRAMEWORK.
STATION WOULD. THEREFORE APPRECIATE HQS VIEWS AND POSSIBLE OPERATIONAL
~ PLANS RE ABOVE MEETING IN ORDER PROVIDE GUIDANCE AND POSSIBLE
SUPPORT THROUGH LOCAL ASSETS.
SECRET
CFN 5655 MARTIN CORREA VEN AD AMICE AMSCROLL 8-10 OCT 69 18-31
CTV AD ORII $12.200 25 30 IV CTV AD RNBEING'S RN_EPTOME'S I
•
7 OCT AMWASP-1 IPHOODCAP
BI
!..
✓ SECRET _
Question use
e of AAWASP
..
the
Op.
Ex
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_390.jpeg ---
1
14-00000
INDI
*O
YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
FROM
ACTION
INFO
SMWAVE
WH/C8.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
42
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
7:5
15
File
pr
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ☐
---
nection
☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUD
Trim Titer.
1881
REPRODUCTION PROMIGATED
Ma
ELIC
CA
Eur
15
UNIT
TIME
+
FILE VE, WHS CAR, CA/PROP, CA/04, 004, Do/H3, FES, CI, Chops,
FI FILINT CA/PEG
SECRE I 11.1006
DIR INFO CARA CITE WAVE 5655
TYPIC MHSPAWN MHVIPER
TYPIC
Joserration
11 SEP 65 IN 50224 E
W
MARTIN CORREA, VEN AD DEPUTY, PRES OF PORTWORKERS FEDERATION
OF VEN, MEMBER CUBAN TRADE BOYCOTT COMMITIEE, AND CLOSE COLLABORATOR
AMICE AND AMSCROLL, NOW ORGANIZING CONTINENTAL CONVENTION OF
PORTWORKERS TO BE HELD CARACAS 8-10 OCT 65. IN ADDITION REGULAR
CONVENTION AGENDA WHICH INCLUDES ELECTION OF NEW EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF NATIONAL FEDERATION AND REVISION FEDERATION STATUTES, MAIN
PROGRAM OF CONVENTION AIMED AT ODIAINING UNIFIED INTERNATIONAL
ACTION RE CUBAN TRADE BOYCOTT. DURING CORREA VISI 18-31 AUG 10
JMWAVE AREA, CORREA DISCUSSED CONVENTION PLANS WITH AMICE AMSCPOLL
AS FOLLOWS:
A. CONVENTION AND ITS AGENDA APPROVED AND SUPPORTED BY CTV
AND LABOR SECTION OF AD.
U.R.
19-120-26)
B. WILL INVITE INTERNATIONAL PAPTICIPATION AND CONVOKE
ROUND-TABLE MEETING OF MEMBERS OF COMMISSION AGAINST COMMUNIST
TYRANNY OF CUBA" FOR PURPOSE CLARIFY
BOYCOTT ACTIONS.
_ SECRET
APPLY COORDINATED CUBAN TRADE
WRABLY
5472

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_393.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
E. I. Harrison/sp
WH/C/CA/PP
6678
: 18 Aug 65
JMWAVE
M: DIRECTOR
XY NO INCEN
[] FILE IN OS MALE NÓ,
MESSAGE PARM
TUTAL COPIEST
ECRET
CIST
☐ RETURN TO BRANCH ☐ FILE RID
XXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
ROUTING
Pe
5
Ca-Eu
2
C
3
MO
F1-T6
TO Aug
18 Acc 65 20 050
VR. FILC ☐ RID COPY CAZ, CA/PROP,
WE8
SIG-CEN
5006
\F :
: WHICH
INFO:
WAVE
INFO
CITE DIR
TYPIC MHVIPER MHSPAWN
REF: WAVE 5061 (IN 34271) *
STORY.
IIQS HAS NO OBJECTION AMSCROLL PLAY REF "FREE NAVIGATOR"
HOWEVER, KUCLAN REPORT 16 AUGUST STATES SHIP LEFT FOR
ROTTERDAM 11 AUGUST.
END OF MESSAGE
* Requested approva' AMSCROLL play of "Froo Navigator" story.
36520
7
.
Albores
WILLIAM V. BROE
(CAWH
RELEASING OFFICER
DFD
18-8
TIF
DC/WH/C/CA
C/WH/C/MO
DR
Scull 19.120.20
COORDINATING OFFICERS
SECRET
GROUP 1
Eluded from qua
2 and
341-0
=
24
JOHN T. FLYNN
ADCWHD/C
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
MAN THE ICCHING ORICE
K DOAHIRITER
COPY NO.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_394.jpeg ---
14-00000
TRANSMITTAL MANIFEST
TO
Chief, WH
Attn: WH/C
Peter S. JASUTIS
ITEM NO.
DESCRIPTION
FROM
COS, JMWAVE
}
No 275956
U.R. Memo #1096-SovFishingBago
Ref: WAVE 4039
USE
Hild for Chacours
1
DATE
26 July 65
RM
10
1236 Use PREVIOUS EDITION
SIGNATURE
SC
(13-47)

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_395.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR
Pp. 1
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
:
:
MEMORANDUM 1096
TO: Dr. Mario Seiglie Montoro
FROM: Dr. Rafael Rivas-Vasques
'
REF.:
News Coverage of Press
Release on Soviet "Fishing"
Base.
:
:
Press Coverage on U.R.'s press release regarding Soviet
"Fishing" Base follows:
:
July 20, 1965:
Norman Diaz
W.M.E.T.
Manolo Reyes
W.T.V.J. Channel 4
Wayne Farris
W.C.K.T. Channel 7
Tony Solar
"Noticias en Espanol"
Miami News 'p. 9-A
JULY 21, 1965:
Radio-Hora
W.M.E.T.
JULY 22, 1965:
Diario Las Americas
"Micronoticias" p. 16
JULY 24, 1965:
Agencia de Informaciones Periodisticas
(A.I.P.) No. 324
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
:
TELEFONO FR 3-8033

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_396.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
"Novedades" (will forward date)
Mexico, D.F.,
Mexico
Vida del Litoral (will forward date)
"El Universal"
Caracas, Venezuela
C
Miami, July 22, 1965
10 SE 9 ST. MIAMI, FLORIDA
:
TELEFONO FR 3-8033
:
:
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_397.jpeg ---
14-00000
UR press release
A PRESS SERVICE FROM
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
OFFICE:
10 S. E. 9 St.
MAILING ADDRESS
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
PHONE:
373-8033
U.R. REFORTS
SOVIET "FISHING" BASE IN HAVANA
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UR) has learned from its underground sour -
ces in Cuba the following information:
The Russians are constructing docks, warehouses, freezers, dry
docks, buildings with communication equipment and other necessary ins-
tallations for the operation of a fishing fleet in the east coast of
the port of Havana, according to the Cuban-Soviet agreement of Septem-
ber, 1962.
>..
These constructions are directed and supervised by Soviet techni-
cians with the collaboration of Cuban "slave work". The Soviet Union
furnishes all the necessary equipment and machinery, in addition to --
the above mentioned supervision and technical assistance; Cuba offers
the labor as well as the basic construction materials.
It was stipulated that the Soviet Union and Cuba would share in -
equal parts this fishing terminal which original cost was $12 million
pesos" but now it has come up to
finished by the beginning of 1968. $30 millions and is expected to be
-
-
However, it has been learned that due to the large sum owed by
the Castro-Communist regime to the Soviet Union, the Russians have de-
cided that these facilities will be for their exclusive use once they
are concluded.
->
All the fish caught will be taken to this terminal, processed and
exported to the Soviet Union and Europe in Russian vessels, without
any profit for Cuba, nor the Cuban fishing vessels will be allowed to
use said installations.
This area of the east coast of the port of Havana will be closed
as soon as installations are finished and only Soviet personnel will-
have access to that zone.
-
This absolute control of the Soviets in the same port of Havana-
has led many to think that said installations will not only serve for
operating Soviet trawlers - which activities in espionage, infiltration
C subversive and terrorist agents are well known but that it might
hide military constructions, submarine pens, and other installations
that could threaten the security of the Hemisphere.
-
-
Miami, July 19, 1965
Ref: 190
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UR)
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_399.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
INDLEY ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO
FILE NO.
1.REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
PERSON
SECRET
FROM
ACTION
INFO
TOTAL COPIES
TIPI
2-2
JAWANE
FILE
3
✓ RID COPY.
VR
JR, CA E, CA/Fed celta, kon
ANCE CON
☐
VED
ISAVED
☐ SLOTTED ☐ TURES
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
IME
SECRET 162345Z ·
DIR CITE WAVE 3048 CING HURST ACTING:
TYPIC MHVIPER
16 June &5 IN 92094
1. AMSCROLL SECGEN REPORTS FINAL SESSION CHAMBER COMMERCE OF
AMERICAS UNANIMOUS PASSAGE RESOLUTION DRAFTED BY AMSCROLL DENOUNCING
CASTRO REGIME AND RECOMMENDING MEMBER NATION FIRMS DESIST TRADE WITH
b
CUBA DIRECT OR INDIRECT, AND USE INFLUENCE OF HER FREE WORLD FIRMS DO
CURACAO, SURINAM AND ARUBA ABSTAINING LACKING AUTHORITY FROM
SAME.
Gout"
DUTCH VOGT BUT EXPRESSED SYMPAI HY.
2. MOTION INTRODUCED BY MANUEL CASTILLO, FORMAER PANAMANIAN
CONSUL MIAMI, WHO ALSO TAPING MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT PANAMA TO CUBAN
PEOPLE FOR AMSCROLL RADIO PROGRAM. AMSCROLL ISSUING PRESS
RELEASE, CARRYING RESOLUTION AMT HIGH 17 JUNE. POUCHING DETAILS.
SECRET
CFN
SECRET
i
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET
CAMIEGIMBA AND MINDER2
UFGA-29593
All of the persons on this list have been with AMSCROLL in
excess of three years except Alfredo HERNANDEZ-LOVIA who was
He was paid the full three months
terminated in October 1965.
termination due to the unusually faithful service ne has rendered
He worked full time for $90.00 per
for a very small salary.
month.
3.
:
None of those listed in paragraph two has an NOC or
an OA with the exception of HERNANDEZ-LOVIA who was granted
an OA on 29 May 1967. The Station requests that this OA be
cancelled.
1
4. All of the above AMSCROLL personnel were amicably
terminated and the personnel have since been re-employed in
the local community So far as the Station is aware, there
have been no security, personnel, or other problems of interest
to the Station resulting from the termination of this activity.
•
5. There were four Station agents involved in this opera-
They were AMWORD-1,
tion at the time of its termination.
All but AMFRAME-1 were
AMWORD-2, AMWORD-3, and AMFRAME-1.
terminated and individual termination dispatches are being
forwarded as appropriate.
Roger &c. Manchback
Roger E. MARCHBANK
CLASSIFICATION
FORM
06453a
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
SECRET
CONTINUED
PAGE NO.
2

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_40.jpeg ---
14-00000
DISPATCH
Chiof, WH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
AUS
11/006
PROCESSING
83
CALY QUALIFIN
HEADQUARÝ P
CAN JUDGE WA
ABSTRACT
0
FROS
Chief of Station, JMWAVE Art
0
SUBJECT TYPIC/Operational
Receipt of Information from Unidentified Source within Cuba.
ACTION REQUIRED · REFERENCES
Action Required:
Reference:
FYI
None
1. On 27 March 1967, a letter from Cuba was received at
the postal address given by the radio program of ANSCROLL.
The letter had been mailed in Habana on 4 March 1967 and the
contents included three photos of an unidentified individual
and one photo each of individuals identified as Reynaldo
*IRSULA Broa and Antonio FERNANDEZ Fornandez. A note which
was Included stated that henceforth the Bendor would identify
himself as #Pancrasio". Ho indicated that if it was desired
receipt of his letter could be mentioned on the AMSCROLL
radio program but that nover should any mention of the
contents be mentioned as this could reveal his identity to
the DSE. Pancrasio stated his help would not be much but
that his letters might contain information which could be
of value. Ho wrote that he could not go into detail as
he was unable to spend much time at the typewriter.
Pancrasio concluded by saying the photos of Antonio and
Reynaldo were in the hands of a socurity agent who had
orders to find them. They had both been fugitives for a
long time. The other photo (in triplicate) was of a
Canadian citizen whose passport was retained by the DSE and
was reported as lost for an unexplained motive.
.
2. On 10 April 1967, the message from Pancrasio was
ac nowledged by radio and he was thanked for his letter and
told to continue his correspondence.
3. On 21 April 1967, a second letter from Pancrasio
was received via Key West, Florida. The letter had been
Attachment-U/S/C (d)
Copies of info received
Distribution:
Distr
✓ - WH/COG
CS COPY
CROSS REFERENCE TO
Stanley B. JERSAWIT
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
9 May 67 MAY 11 1967
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
1207.
CLASS,PATA'
SECRET
UFGA-27543
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
26
i
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_398.jpeg ---
8714
14-00000
DR
boletín informativo
UN SERVICIO DE PRENSA DEL
MOVIMIENTO UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (U.R.)
ORCINAS:
10 S. E. 9 St.
DIRECCION POSTAL:
Box 3940
Miami, Florida
TELEFONO.
373 - 8033
*
U.R. Informa:
BASE "PESQUERA" SOVIETICA EN LA HABANA
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UR) ha podido conocer a través de sus fuentes clandeş
tinas en Cuba los siguientes informes:
Los rusos están construyendo muelles, diques secos, naves refrigeradas, plan
tas de comunicaciones y demás instalaciones necesarias para las operaciones
flota pesquera en la costa este dėl puerto de La Habana, conforme a
lo estipulado en el acuerdo Soviético-Cubano de Septiembre de 1962.
de una
Estas construcciones se llevan a cabo bajo la dirección y supervisión de téc
nicos soviéticos, con la colaboración de "trabajo esclavo" cubano. La Unión
Soviética facilita todos los equipos y maquinarias, además de la mencionada
supervisión y asistencia técnicas, y Cuba pone la arena, piedras y materia-
les básicos de construcción, aparte de la mano de obra.
Se habia estipulado
estipulado que la Unión Soviética y Cuba usufructuasen a partes
iguales esta terminal pesquera de vastas proporciones, cuyo costo original
era de $12 millones de "pesos", pero que ya asciende a $30 millones y que se
espera estará terminada para principios de 1966.
Sin embargo, se ha podido conocer que debido a la cuantiosa suma que el régi
men Castro-Comuniste adeuda a la Unión Soviética, los rusos han determinado
cue estas instalaciones serán para su uso exclusivo una vez terminadas.
Toda la pesca será llevada a esta terminal, procesada y exportada para la
Unión Soviética y Europa en mercantes rusos, sir que se derive provecho algu
no para Cuta y sin que los pesqueros cubanos puedan hacer uso de dichas ins-
talaciones.
Esta área en la costa este del puerto de La Habana será cerrada en cuanto se
terminen las instalaciones y sólo el personal soviético tendrá acceso a esta
zona.
•
Este control absoluto soviético en el propio puerto de La Habana ha hecho
pensar a muchos que dichas instalaciones no sólo servirán para las operacio-
nes de los "pesqueros" rusos -cuyas actividades de espionaje, infiltración
de apentes subversivos y terroristas son harto conocidas- sino que pueden es
conder construcciones militares, bases para submarinos y otras instalaciones
que amenacen la seguridad del Hemisferio.
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UR)
1
:
:
r
T
Ref.: 194
Miami, 19 de Julio de 1965
1
kadar di v

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_400.jpeg ---
14-00000
10
IEE
PROCESSING
CLASSIFICATION
"SECRET
PRO
POSED
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
x
MÅRKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, Athens
INTO
Chief, EE; Chief, WH
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT NYX18/PBRUMEN/Operational
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
AR:
letter from "Nation" Reporter to AMSCROLL
Pls advise of any operational interest.
HEADQUARTERS DER
CAN RIDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
1. Forwarded under soparate cover is a copy of a letter received
by AMSCROLL from an individual who claims to be a reporter for Nation,
and who says that he is planning to visit New York and Miami in the
near future. He expressos cympathy with the cause of Cuban freedom,
based on his following of the AMSCROLL publicity in the Galbo affair,
and asks to meet AMSCROLL principals to work out some ideas presumably
for a subsequent anti-Castro campaign.
2. Please advise if you have any specific operational interest
in this individual, or if you have any preferences in the matter of
AMSCROLL's dealing with him. AMSCROLL is replying with thanks for the
Criter's interest and with anticipation of future close and friendly
cooperation.
Axt
PHILIP G. ELMARD
Attachment:
Letter, zerox copy, u/sc (acci()
Distribution:
3 - COS. Athens, w/attach, u/sc
2 LC/LE), w/attach, u/sc
2 -
//attach, u/sc
2cc
wfate fund WH/c/E5
1000
Exctors
CROSS REFERENCE TO
C
C
63 COPY
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
19-120-36
DATE TYPED
14 June 65
DATE DISPATCHED
JUN 18
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 22,012
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_402.jpeg ---
14-00000
So,
ŷ cus
waising
youz
jour
letter
and details
ab out
adress
there
jó
so that I can
find you
easily.
I will write
then
some
Grių
about
our
volution nacy
moviment
from
interesting sufestions
meeting, interview, ce
alwowgs good ideas. good by
have
very
w
neus
uch.
Sincerely yours
Dimitrios
Journalist
Member of the union
Athen our press.
•
unfill
ests. A Buck has
I will
Thank
yreu
you
Hron boukid
My adress:
1
--J. Zrouboukis
8 Seizani Sta.
✓ mittos
A thous
freece
3
S
:
r
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_401.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
A ti
-
Mr. Seigle,
First, sorry for my bad Englishs.
newspapers
I real
frowe
I agree that
sended to the greek prime
Papsundresu.
must set out of this coun-
galle, the Cuban chargé
of the Athenian
Athens,
their feelings. Many of th
In the Athenricus
Cetter you
minister
twe
Greek premiet
Frij
d" affaires in
Many readers
news papers
take your
adress. They
mant
asked to
to ex-
press you
wrate
that
they mant
bien
" to jet out
in
stron
Anyway,
this is
my letter
what I mount
ij
is that I am.
se
Athenian
and old
should like very
wifle you
C C
to
3 (!) days
go
to Cu-
Fidel Ca
the preface of
to fill your
reporter of a great
very much
since y
news piepert
.by...
to be in tuch
I intend to come in
to the world's
couple of mouths
of New York
ias
Faiz
I went again
last
and then
to came in
year
Micinly.
So, I want
very
much to
miet tjou
and
have
intervien
with
and
lutionary
overy 1
an
your
for my newspaper
interesting
zens-
16 June 1965
art. #1 to UFGA-22012
19-120-26
j
I
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_406.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
FORM
5.60 53a
(40)
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
IDENTITY:
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
SEPARATE COVER ATTACH-
MENT NO. 1 TO UFGA 2179
Reinaldo MIYARES Lopez
CLASSIFICATION
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
SECRET
Cater 1
Ten autorail
CONTINUED
PAGE NO.
1
'
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_405.jpeg ---
14-00000
CLASSIFICATION
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET
D.
FUTURE PLANS
1
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 21797
No substantive changes are contemplated in the handling of this
activity. Efforts will be continued to judge the efficacy of
current programs, and to adjust the amount and type of propaganda
produced as necessary.
I
for
ANDREW K. REUTEMAN
I
:
1
:
=
FORM
5.60 53a
CLASSIFICATION
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
(40)
CONTINUED
PAGE NO.
AKU IZLOMISE

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_403.jpeg ---
14-00000
10
INFO
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
!
PRO
POSED
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
F.j
PROCESSING
:
ACTION
MARKED FOR INDEKING
NO INAFIN QUIRED
ONET (SALTBD
HEALFA,BWIĘKS
CAN JUDYS INTA SING
ARGIDACT
MA
SUBJECT
TYPIC/AMSCROLL/Operational
Progress Report 1 January - 31 March 1965
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
alf of
ACTION REQUIRED:
REFERENCE:
Ad
FYI
UFGA 19537, 1 February 1965
OPERATIONAL
•
1. During the reporting period AMSCROLL continued to function as
Station JMWAVE's MHVIPER action and propaganda vehicle. Toward the
end of March AMSCROLL also assumed the bulk of the heirloom operation
which is now being taken over by a separate committee. Some of the
more significant activities, which have boon covered in other
correspondence, were "black list" letters to specific firms in Japan
and Greece, sont at the behest of and according to guidance from
Tokyo and Athons Stations, AMBLEAK-1's "truth squad" tactics against
the Japanese trade mission touring Latin Amorica and the initiation
of regular reports to Spanish officials, in a list provided by Madrid
Station, on the anti-Spanish contents of broadcasts from Havana by the
Cuban-Spanish Friendship Association.
2. Although there were some petty disagreements among AMSCROLL
personnel, reported in detail by our unilateral penetration, AMFRAME-1,
there was relative calm during the period, and occasional manifestations
of esprit de corps were noted in AMSCROLL despite the general flagging
of morale in the exile community at large.
3. The only change in the AMSCROLL executive committee took
effect in March when the Secretary of Finance, Identity, resigned to
take a position in an Ecuadorian commercial firm. Other personnel
changes were made with only minor significance.
B.
PRODUCTION
-
4. Propaganda to Cuba (samples in Attachment 2) included the pony-
sized monthly bulletin; a leaflet on personal security, this being a
new issue showing that the greatest danger to self and family is to do
nothing while Castro-Communism tightens its grip on the whole of Cuban
Attachments:
1.
2.
Identity, USC
Prop Saples, CubUSTICE TO
3. Prop Samples, LA, USC
4.
Press Release, USC
Distribution:
3- WH/C
4.
(Continued)
1
autotall
Cofeting and
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET CG L..
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
28 May 65 JUN 9 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 21797
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-36
19-120-26/3
1958729

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_407.jpeg ---
DE 201
akurát na
14-00000
O
=
9 OCT 1968
P
UFGA-21616
20 May 65
19-120.26.
;
i.
i
Art and want
:
1664d and u
Yas classified
's bed de sarca
5 38
-
:
19-132-49/3
For filing with attachment...
:
THE CO COPY OF THIS IC
BY RID/ARD 'RPU CN
w/s/c/att. 5
REWOVAL SLIP
DOC. SYMBOL & NUMBRP UFGA-21552
DOC. DATE
19 May 1965
5 OCT 1968 WAS REMOVED FROM THIS FILE #19-120-26
AND FORWARDED TO RID 'FILES
RIDAN
RID/MIS
RID/PS
J.
It was KAPOĽ and unprocessed.
It was MYPAT and unprocessed.
2.
3.
6.
0
It was EYES ALONE and unprocessed.
It was DEFERRED.
It was classified into file
It is an indexed document.
19-126-34/3
For filing with atts. 1,2,3+4
IT WA
5

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_404.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
FICATION
DISPATCH SM
OL AND NUMBER
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET
UFGA 21797
society; "handwritten" cover letters, which are actually printed script
to make the propaganda envelopes appear to contain personal lotters
when put to the light test by censors; and receipt acknowledgement forms,
a simple slip of paper now attached to all propaganda mailings
requesting the recipient to send the form back to AMSCROLL's post office
bex, or to any other address in the free world for forwarding to
AMSCROLL, as a check on how much propaganda is getting through,
the period AMSCROLL sent out 58,000 envelopes containing 130,000 items.
During
5. To Latin America primarily, with a scattering of items to
Europe, Asin and the United States, AMSCROLL sent out 30,000 items
indluding its tabloid house organ (which is now cut down to 4 pages
from its former 8, and is published only once a month instead of twice),
several booklets reprinted by continued request of correspondents (one
of the largest orders having come from Dominican General Wossin y Wessin
shortly before the rebellion) and a map showing training sites in Cuba
for Latin Amorican guerrillas (samples in Attachment 3).
6. News releases were issued on a number of current topics,
AMSCROLL as usual taking the economic warfare angle on the news of the
day as it effected Cuba. The 17 releases of this period were sont to
newspapers, wire services, magazines, radio and TV stations throughout
the free world in approximately 350 copies each. The local public
media made use of approximately 65% of AMSCROLL's press reloases.
Although occasional indications are received that AMSCROLL matorials
are used in other nowspaper and magazine articles, radio programs and
the like, there is no way of making a good estimate of the amount of
such replay. Among the more important titlos were the following
(copies in Attachment 4):
a.
bo
c.
d.
Li
g.'
--
an Analysis
Free-World Ships Continue Aid to Cuban Economy:
Cuban Budget Includes Proof Economy Crumbling
Possible Soviet Curtailment of Cuban Aid Seen
Greek Firm Bilked in Cuban Trado Negotiations
Japan Secks Expansion of LA Trade While Defying OAS in
Cuban Trafic
Sovbloc Undermining Castro Sugar Markets
Castro Auctioning Heirlooms Taken from Fleeing Refugees
7. Other political action and propaganda moves noted in paragraph
1, above, were reported separately in detail, and a full set of
"black list" correspondence was forwardod to Headquarters in UFGA 21616
with a request for any further MHVIPER lends which might contribute to
the further effectiveness of this campaign.
8. AMSCROLL radio programs, 15 minutes daily over both WMIE and
AMTHIGH, carried much the same themes as the AMSCROLL press releases,
but with adjustments as necessary for the Cuban audience, e.g., while
AMSCROLL press releases might complain about continued free-world
trade with and shipping to Cuba, the radio program would emphasize any
decreases in the number of ships.
9.
Reactions to AMSCROLL propaganda continue to arrive from Cuba,
but at a slow pace. The 24 letters received during the past period
contained 7 newspaper clippings and three pages torn from telephone
books, as requested in AMSCROLL radio programs. Nine of the letters
mentioned the AMTHIGH broadcasts, one noted receipt of the pony-sized
bulletin and two remitted the small acknowledgement forms which accompany
all AMSCROLL propaganda mailed into Cuba. Detailed statistics on these
are submitted in a separate report from JMWAVE.
C.
FINANCIAL
Salaries (January
-
March)
Operational Expenses (January-March
TOTAL
$ 15,360.00
36,500.00
$ 51,860.00
CLASSIFICATION
PAGE NO.
FORM
8.60 53a
(40)
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
SECRET
✗
CONTINUED
2 of 3
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_409.jpeg ---
14-00000
J. HART
File
ORIG R. Rastotter/bh
DATE,
C/WH/C/CA
6567
UNIT 1
EXT
27 Apr 65
JMWAVE MADRID
TO
m
(5) INDEX
☐ NO INDEX
el
MESSAGE FORM
15 BECRET
☐ FILE IN CS FILE NO.
22
2
ROUTING
S
6
8
FROM DIRECTOR
CONT, WH/C 8
TO
WAVE
INFO VR, FILE, DDP, WE 6, Cilops,
CiloA, CA'2, CA/PROP.
TYPIC KEYWAY MIIVIPER
INFO, MADR
REFS: A. MADR 3992 (IN 52779)
B.
WAVE 1064 (IN 51819)
27 APR 65 18 10z
SIS CER
CITE DIR
04886
1, CONCUR REF A. DO NOT DESIRE COMMITTEE BE SET UP MADR;
FOR MAXIMUM CONTROL, FEEL THIS BEST DONE WAVE AREA.
MAX
2. MOST PLEASED EFFECTIVE ROLE PLAYED BY AMSCROLL TO DATE.
HOPE AMSCROLL CAN SET UP NON-POLITICAL COMMITTEE OF REPUTABLE
CUBANS WHICH WOULD ACT AS ITS EXECUTIVE AGENT.
END OF MESSAGE
Arkend Haw
DESMOND FITZGERALD
C/WH
WE/5
i
RAJI
JOHN L. HART
DCWHD/C
BELEADING OFFICE*
27-9
COORDINATING OPPIČENO
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from tomat
downgrading and
declassificaties
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICES
!
Copy No.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_408.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
1
ORG :
UXIT:
EXT :
DATE :
JLHart: dap
DCWHD/C
7264
☐ INDEX
☐ NO INDEX
51
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
28 April 65] FILE IN CS FILE NO.
TO 2
JMWAVE
FROM DIRECTOR
CONF
W/N/C
MADRID
INFO: 2000 WE 6 CAZ) CA/AROP, C7/ORS 05/04, VR, FILE
TO
WAVE
INFO
MADR
TYPIC KEYWAY MHVIPER
REF: DIR 04886
17 42
ROUTING
PP
4
mo
2
5
3
DEWIRK 6
CA-EN
DEFERRED
ROUTINE
CITE DIR
05230
To Sc
Ex
PARA 2 REF SHOULD READ: "HOPE AMSCROLL CAN SET UP
NON-POLITICAL COMMITTEE OF REPUTABLE CUBANS AND ACT AS ITS
EXECUTIVE AGENT."
-
Plent Hair
Desmond FitzGerald
C/WHD
END OF MESSAGE
Just
WE/5
John L. Hart
DCWHD/C
RELEASING OFFICER
COORDINATING OFFICERS
28-3 SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED..
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
Copy No.
1
!
34
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
in i
r
{'
C
1
NHET
333
UNIDAD MONTHLY, ISSUE, NO. 37, May, 1967
This issue has been almost entirely devoted to a reprint of I. Andrés Collazo's sta-
tement concerning his experience as a CUFLET representative in London. We have re-
printed most of the contents of the statement in the form of a signed article anti-
tled "INSIDE CUFLET".
As is known, Collazo tells of the "dog fights" that have risen between the privateers
(such as FRANGISTAS) and CUFLET over violations of contracts, bad condition of the
ships, etc.
He also discusses the decline in free-world shipping to Cuba and its causes, as well
as the nature and background of the shippers that participate in the Cuban trade,
Besides the above, the following is included in this issue:
PAGE 1:
EDITORIAL: "A COMMUNIST TRUTH": Volsky, the Chief of the Soviet observing delegation
to the CEPAL meeting in Caracas, said that "Cuba is the minor daughter of the USSR,
and minor daughters are pampered". The Russian's insolence has roused the anger of
all well-born Cubans. Yet, there's a lot of truth in what the Pussian said.
Indeed, minor daughters depend on their parents, get everything they need from then,
and are subject to their supreme authority. If the daughter works, she must also turn
a good part of the fruits of her toil over to her parents.
}
This is what happens with Cuba and the USSR. The Soviets and their satellites sell
Cuba 78.6% of her imports, dictate the policy of the Havana régina, and take 80% of
her exports.
In view of this dependence, who can deny that the relation between Cuba and Russia is
that of a minor daughter with respect to her parents?
The Russian only lied when he spoke of "pampering". Cuba is not pampered by Mother
Russia:
she is oppressed, exploited and corrupted by her.
<
*
::
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_410.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
1
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
TOTAL COPIES
FROM
ACTION
INFO
16-124-26
JMWAVE
WA/C8
27
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
VR. FILE DDP, WEb, Cuci/ops, 11/08, F
✓ COPY
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PA
CA-EW
NO
☐
13
☑
FI.TC
UNIT
TIME
SECRET 242049Z
MADR INFO DIR CITE WAVE 1064
TYPIC KEYWAY MHVIPER
REFS: A.
WAVE 3159 CiN 35346)
B. DIR 04279
C. MADR 3910 C IN 45:41)
D. WAVE 1049 CIN 51462
2)
1. VIEW APPARENT SENSITIVITY RE USE AMSCROLL
24 APR 65 IN 51819
u
Sc
NAME THIS OP, SUGGEST MADR HAVE MUSSO REPLY TO AMSCROLL LETTER AS
SUGGESTED PARA 7 REF A, STATING HE SETTING UP INTERNATIONAL
COMMITTEE AND ASKING AMSCROLL PARTICIPATION. MUSSO COULD THEN
PLACE ADS PER REF B WHICH WOULD BE MORE APPROPRIATE COMING FROM
EUROPEAN LOCATION.
2. IF ABOVE NOT FEASIBLE PLS ADVISE AND WAVE WILL ESTABLISH
COMMITTEE AND PLACE ADS.
SECRET
CFN
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_412.jpeg ---
14-00000
FROM
JmwAVE
ACTION
(WHICH
INFO
SIFIED MESSAGE
15/20
SECRET
ASON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES 17
P
ADVANCE COPY
☐
✓....
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP=
FI-TC
"RR-OS
P01
☐ T
SA-Ex
C
52
UNIT
TIME
☐
SLOT
☐
VR. FILE, DDP, CAD, CA/PROP, CHOPS, CILIC2
SECRET 10014İZ
DIR CITE WAVE 0574/
TYPIC MHVIPER
Fell
Ameen
ACTION!!
165 IN 42315
IN REPLY CASTRO CLAIMS REPORTED LOCAL NEWSPAPERS AND RADIO
CUBAN SUGAR PRODUCTION GOALS BEING REACHED, AMSCROLL PREPARING
PRESS RELEASES AND RADIO PROGRAMS 12-14 APR USING FOLL THEMES:
SUGAR DISCRETION STILL STRICTLY ENFORCED. WHY NECESSARY IF SITUATION
ACTUALLY GOOD AS CLAIMED? CASTRO PROHIBITION PUBLICATION ANY STATIS-
TICS DURING HARVEST GAVE AMPLE WARNING BIG LIE TO COME. AMSCROLL
UNDERGROUND REPORTS WIDESPREAD CANE BURNING, SABOTAGE MILLS AND
TRANSPORT FACILITIES, SHORTAGE JUTE BAGS, ADMINISTRATIVE BUNGLING,
LOW WORKER MORALE SCOMBINING PUT 65 CROP IN JEOPARDY. GOC
REFUSAL CANE CUTTERS TRADITIONAL HOLY WEEK VACATION INDICATES
PANIC MORE THAN CONFIDENCE. CONCERN PROBABLY HEIGHTENED BY CONSID-
ERATION REGINE'S SLIM MARGIN PROFIT EVEN FROM FAIRLY GOOD HARVEST
AT CURRENT WORLD PRICES AND COMPETION FROM NEW SUGAR PRODUCING
NATIONS. FINAL CRITERION CASTRO BRAVADO.
WHEN IN TROUBLE.
SECRET
CFN
HE ALWAYS TALKS BIGGEST
fr
11
F
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_413.jpeg ---
14-00000
ROM
A ☐ YES
UR
CLASSIFY FNO20-36
NOG
THE ☐ TO BRANCH,
unisor [nd
IM WAVE
CTION
w
WH/C8
CLA IFIED MESSAGE
11/5 SECRET
N UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
✓....
23
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
COX'P
F
ADVANCE COF♥
UNIT
TIME
☐.
☐
DUNNT
VR. FILE DDP, WH7, CAZ, CA/DEG, CA/PROP, RI/AN
15ECRET 131940Z
С DIR INFO MEXI CITE WAVE 0663
PTYPIC MHVIPER
REF A DIR 00695
3082 (IN 413463) +
B
MEXI 3082
1.
AN
PO DEST
ABSTRACT ✗IN
1
WH/C/0
13 APR 65 IN 44 335
pm
AMSCROLL WILL DISTRIBUTE ENGLISH LANGUAGE HANDBILL SIX
- MAJOR THEATERS WAVE AREA 15-17 APR. EXPECT RADIO PRESS AND TV
RCOVERAGE. JMHOPE AND OTHER RADIO ASSETS WILL PLAY STORY INTO
C
0 2.
P
'CUBA AND AMHIM WILL INCLUDE IN REGULAR BULLETIN FOR LATIN AMERICA.
MEXI: RE PARA 3 REF A PLS ADVISE IF WAVE PRINTING DESIRED.
YCAN PRINT SPANISH LANGUAGE HANDBILLS ATTRIBUTED AMSCROLL. ASSUME
ANONYMOUS HANDBILLS WOULD CREATE PROBLEMS WITH MEXICAN AUTHORITIES.
ALSO ADVISE FASTEST METHOD MAILING MATERIAL TO MEXI AND ANY
CENSORSHIP PROBLEMS IF OPEN MAIL USED, RE PARA TWO REF B
WAVE TRYING ARRANGE COMMERCIAL TV AND NEWSREEL COVERAGE OF PARA 1
RACTIVITY THROUGH IDENTITY. IF SUCCESSFUL, SUGGEST MEXI ASSETS
CIELEPHONE IDENTITY AND PURCHASE
I
P
R
P
RI COP>
R-
CLIPS. WILL ADVISE MEXI WHEN
0
P
IDENTITY SHOULD BE CONTACTED.
Re Cuave, Assets
Providing Prun
3. INDEX IDENTITY.
SE'Ret
PLAY
SECRET
19-120-26
13 apr 05
COSOLETE
RI COPY
FORM
1-641389
tribut
ICITIONS
✓ RI COPY
(35)
$

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_416.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Colored Cavlit WAVE
&
SECRET
1
d
REFS:
Räc
A.
B.
DIR 95219
C. DIR 98577
WAVE 0397 (IN 39527)
i
Regret misunderstanding derived from refs B and C.
Primary importance in such propaganda is not to bring scrutiny
to lubricants which are basis of large and sensitive NIFASH
operation. Also imperative that exploitation of sabotage
make it appear to have been done inside PBRUMEN.
have
Request
WAVE cancel all uncompleted action which may have bearing on
this problem.
SECRET
1
$

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_415.jpeg ---
14-00000
FROM
*
I'M WAVE
ACTION
W
11/58
VR. FILE
FILE
*
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
37 2/ SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
ISSUED
☐
TOTAL COPIES
SLOTTE
☐
DDP, C1/1-2, CA/PROP,
UNIT
"
COPY
REPRODUCTION PROLIBITED
EW Y/CA/PR-
FI-IC
mes
TIME
FI,
RR-RE
DAI
+
BY
CAZ
Mr. Chaconas
Misson
Fili
Amscras
U.R.
SECRET 062225Z
DIR CITE WAVE 0397
TYPIC MHVIPËR
REF A DIR 95219
B
DIR 98577
*
6 APR 65 IN 3.9527
ADI
1
-
AMSCROLL ISSUING RELEASE TO LOCAL PRESS RADIO AND WIRE SERVICES
6 APR AND BROADCASTING TO CUBA. RELEASE BASED REFS SUMMARIZES
AS FOLLOWS: ONE OF OUR UNDERGROUND UNITS REPORTS SPECTACULAR CON
TINUING SUCCESS SABOTAGE AGAINST RICHARD CONTINENIAL TRACTORS INN
TED FROM FRANCE. SINCE SUMMER 64 WHEN TWO SHIPMENTS TOTAL 33
„TRACTORS VARIOUS MODELS CONTAMINATED WITH ABRASIVES, THIS GROUP
PLAYING HAVOC CUBAN HEAVY DUTY MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT. ONE ACTICS
AUG 64 PUT 70 OF 160 RICHARD TRACTORS OUT OF USE, 7 BEYOND REPAIR,
THROUGH SPECIALLY PREPARED LUBRICANTS WHICH MINCONS INVESTIGA TORS
DISCOVERED TOO LATE. DESPITE INCREASED SURVEILLANCE, SAB GROUP
USING NEW MORE SOPHISTICATED METHODS REGULARLY SABOTAGING EARTH
MOVERS ETC, GIANT BULLDOZERS, ETC.
SECRET
+ REF RYBAT.
CFN
SELL
FYI
This couldlause flap & flope
of NFASH. West Be
Constantiny alert to dangers
of putting our
Prop. font
so partite bite that
we ping the windpipes. a

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_411.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
|CUSHIO
MARVED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN FUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
10
DIFO
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief of Station, San Jose
Chief, WH Division
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
✓ Forwarding of Counterrevolutionary Handbook Studios
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
REFERENCE: UFGA-18641, para 3, dated 17 November 1964
ACTION
-
=
See paragraph 2.
1. Forwarded herewith is one copy of each of the following
Counterrevolutionary Handbook Studies:
AAM
ACCE
->
ANAC
ANC
FJC
FJR
Asociacion Amigos del Mar (AAM) and Fraternidad
do las 90 Millas
Asociacion de Colonos Cubanos en el Exilio
Alianza Nacional Anti-Comunista
Asociacion Nationalista Cubana
Frente do Joventudos Cristianas
Fronto do Joventudos Revolucionario
(The FJR, boing a newly formed organization, is
not listed in the Index to the Counterrevolutionary
Handbook. It is suggested that it be "written
in" until a now Index can be completed.)
Junta Revolucionaria Cubana
Movimiento Accion Patriotica Americana
Movimiento Insurreccional de Recuperacion
Revolucionaria.
JURE
MAPA
MIRR
-
-
MRN
MRTN
OAS
ROCE
RDR
SFNE
-
Radio Club de Cuba en el Exilio
->
UND
El Movimiento de Resistencia Nacional
Movimiento Revolucionario 30 de Noviembre
Operacion "Alpha 66"
2.
Rescate Democratico Revolucionario
Segundo Frente Nacional de Escambray
Union Nacional Democratica "Movimiento 20 de Mayo"
The above listed studies should be filed alphabetically in
Part II of the Counterrevolutionary Handbook forwarded under reference.
1
Attachment: CR Handbook Studies, h/w
Distribution:
Orig & 2-COS, San Jose - w/att
-
ROSS REFERENCE TO
2-Chief, WH, Wate
W/85144
43002 1
Excludes is astomatic]
tosh,faging and
FICATION
Rene
B
ANDREW
S-E-C-R-E-T
Trans
REUTEMAN
19-120-2
DATE TYPED
n
DATE DISPATCHED
13 April 65 APR 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-21009
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-9-12
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_414.jpeg ---
14-00000
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
TOTAL COPIES
43
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
FROM
_
ACTION
INFO
IMWAVE
WH/C &
ADVANCE COPY
☐
LOV
TUBEO
UNIT
VR. FILE DDP, EE4, D04, DO/H3, CA2, CA/PROP, FI
:
✓ ....
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP
TIME
ALAU
Mo
CA.EW
R
x
f.
SECRET 0700 15Z
DIR INFO HAMB BRUN FRAN GMNY CITE WAVE 04 15
TYPIC MHVIPER
REF DIR 95998 ✓
to
7 APR 65 39642
B
AND
Sc
Ext
AMSCROLL SENT LETTER 5 MAR TO WIKING, COPIES TO GERMAN FORMIN
BONN, GERMAN EMBASSY WASH, GERMAN DELEGATION TO UN, US SECY OF
COMMERCE. CONTENTS LETTER IN PRESS RELEASE 6 MAR DELIVERED LOCAL
MEDIA OUTLETS AND SENT LARGE NUMBER EUROPEAN PRESS REPS INCLUDING
JOURNAL OF COMMERCE CORRESPONDENTS NEW YORK AND EUROPE AND GERMAN.
NEWSPAPERS.
SECRET
CFN
I
*
SECRET
:
;
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_417.jpeg ---
14-00000
NRT MMAY
ORIG.
UNIT
EXI
DATI
10
'
SHERRY/hak
WH/C/CA/EW
6957
1 APRIL 65
JMWAVE
FROM DIRECTOR
SONG.
INDEX
MESSAGE FORM
ROUTING
1
✗SECKET
84
35
2
3
7
$
200-120-53
☐ NO DOX
☑PENCS S NO.
265 22 22:
DC/WHICS NO VR. FILE, DAP. CIFI, CIFIIDY
10
WAVE
INFO
ADOP
RYBAT TYPIC ZRPERUSAL
INFO.
CITE DER
FRENCH FIRM RICHARD PRERES HAS SUPPLIED SEVERAL HUNDRED 78577
TRACTORS TO CUBA IN LITTLE OVER ONE YEAR. THESE INCLUDED FOUR
OR FIVE TYPES OF WHICH CD1O PROBABLY HEAVIEST.
FOR THESE TRACTORS APPEARS BE HAVANA,
MAIN UNLOADING PORT
TWO SHIPMENTS INVOLVING ABOUT
30 TRACTORS OF DIFFERENT TYPES WERE CONTAMINATED WITH ABRASIVES
IN MAY AND JUNE
196
END OF MESSAGE
Wave 0397
6APRIL65
Allores
for
SMOND FITZGERALD
DEST
C/WED
Ki
C/WH/CZOS
RELEASING
1-
JOHN L. HART
✓ DCWHD/C
1
2-24
COORDINATING OFFICERE.
8 B CRET
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSU:
GROUP 1
garding edən ş
FFICE IS PROHIBITED.
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICED
Casy No.
2

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_418.jpeg ---
14-00000
9
C.P.CHERRY/mak
WH/C/CA/EW
.6957
CA. 23 MARCH 1965
10 JHWAVE
FROM DIRECTOR
CONF.
10
PC/WH/C 5
WAVE
INDEX
LABSSAGH PORN 25 B
ROUTING
2
ich
25 SECRET
21
J
☑FILE IN CS FILE NO
200-120-38
S
☐ NO INDEX
J. :
NO DOP, ADDP, c/c1, o/F, 2, d/fi/14, c/CA 2, 4/4104,
C/WE 3, VR, FILE
INJO
FID
CITE DIR
WAVE 0075
95219
1
7
RYBAT PERUMEN MHYIPER ZRPERUSAL
1.
31 MARLS.
FOLLOWING MESSAGE RELAYED: 15 MAR 65, FROM COSQUE, MINCON,
HAVANA TO RICHARD CONTINENTAL, FRANCE. SEND IMMEDIATELY HIGHLY
QUALIFIED PERSONNEL FOR BULLDOZERS C-D10.
DUE TO DEFECTS IN MANUFACTURE.
CONSTANTLY BREAKING DOWN
2. WAVE PLEASE EXPLOIT. SEVERAL ACTS OF SABOTAGE WERE CARRIED
OUT AGAINST RICHARD TRACTORS IN 1964 USING ABRASIVE IN ENGINE BLOCKS,
SINCE ABRASIVE WAS DISCOVERED BY CUBANS, LINE SHOULD NOW BE, "EON
DO YOU LIKE OUR MORE SOPHISTICATED METHOD? TRACTORS OUR SPECIALTY,
THE HEATHER THE EXTTER."
3. IMPLICATION SHOULD NATURALLY BE THAT ACTS ACCOMPLISHED BY
ANTI-CASTRO GROUP WHOSE STRENGTH LIES BOTH INSIDE AND OUTSIDE CUBA.
END OF MESSAGE
flores
RAFORD W. HERBERT
AC/WHD
RELEASING OFFIC
23-37[
C/WA/C/ES
COORDINATING OFFICERS
SECRET
2001
JOHN L. HART
'DCWHD/C
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROMITTED.
ADIMENTICATING
OFFIC
Capy No.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_42.jpeg ---
14-00000
A
22
C
***
1
PAGE 2:
CARTOON: (By Juis R. Cáceres, Jr.): A shabby-looking character faces Castro and
tells him: "You're a nosy liar and an adventurer!". A Cuban in the foreground
asks a friend: "Who is that, a "gusano"?" "No", replies the friend. "That's a
Latin American pro-Soviet Communist".
*
:
:
:
•

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_423.jpeg ---
14-00000
CLASSIFIED-MESSAGE
UNIT
SECRET
.
EW
FI
5.
PROHIBITED
Syww
mo
CAP
STAVE
WE-8-
YR. FILE
ADVANCE COF
☐
☐
☐
TC.
DDP, WH/C8, CH-2.CH/PROP, CI, CI/eps
CH-2.CH/Phop, CI, Cz/eps to
R F 25222 IZ
• KERT WAVE Have LOCAL!
-T
CUBAN: Sud Ca, uz
To Post RF Shiptirat
TORITY NAGU INFO DIR MADR PARI CITE WAVE 9976 25 ALC
/ RUMEN
VENWAY PERUMEN MHVIPER
LAYING
125
4.
C&A
&
A
DIN 9537)
5
MADR 3504
3574 (02
6230088
24 MAR AMSCROLL SECGEN (IDEN) CONTACTED FOLLOWING INDI-
ALS ON REF MATTER: ALFONSO FANJUL, CARLOS GARCIA BELIHAN
MENDORA, MARIO SEIGLIE (SR), AND, H'IRS DON PEDRO SANCHEZ
STAY THEY IN TURN CONTACTING FRANCISCO ZAYAS, CIPO SOSA
ADA, LILIAM GOMEZ MENA, NORBERTO AZQUETA, SAHARA JOHNSON OE
ANTRA MANUEL ASPURU, ENRIQUE MENDOZA, GUILLERMO SALDO AND MEMBIAS
SAGRA FAMILY.
AHOVE PERSONS PREPARING TEXT NIGHT L TIERS WHICH MOST
1 SEND 25 MAR. WILL ADVISE WHEN FURTHER DETAILS KNOWN,
RE:
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_420.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
A
1
SECRET IN 25346 PAG42
ELEASE AND GAVE IT FULL COVERAGE. AFP WIRED STORY TO NEW YORK.
ALSO PICKED UP BY UPI AND AP.
3. AMSCROLL NOW IN PROCESS PLACING ADS IN ABC, MADRID;
JOURNAL DE GENEVE, GENEVA; DAILY TELEGRAPH, LONDON; LE MONDE,
PARIS; IL COVIESE, ROME; POST, WASHINGTON (DC); LA PRENSA & TIMES,
NEW YORK; EL MUNDO, PUERTO RICO; EXCELSIOR, MEXICO, AND EL UNIVERSAL,
CARACAS ASKING EXILE ART OBJECT OWNERS TO FURNISH AMSCROLL
COPIES SUPPORTING DOCS SHOWING WHAT ITEMS OWNED AND CONFISCATED.
AMSCROLL STATES. IT WILL CATALOGUE THESE CLAIMS AND TAKE ACTION TRY
STOP SALES IN EUROPE. SHOULD THIS FAIL AMSCROLL POINTS OUT IT
INTENDS WARN ART DEALERS AND POTENTIAL BUYERS AROUND WORLD THAT
CATALOGUED ITEMS WILL BE RECLAIMED BY FREE CUBAN GOVT.
4. AMSCROLL SENT CABLES SWISS EMBASSY WASHINGTON AND SWISS
DELAGATION UN WITH COPIES MAJOR SWISS DAILIES AND INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION JURISTS PROTESTING SHIPMENT HEIRLOOM CARGO TO EUROPE
FOR SALE UNDER GENEVA CONVENTION PROHIBITION LOOTING OR PLUNDERING
IN WAR OR PEACE.
5. AMSCROLL WILL START CABLE CAMPAIGN ALONG LINES SUGGESTED
BY REF D PARA 2 ON 2 APRIL.
6.
INITIAL WAVE AREA EXILE RESPONSE TO ART OBJECT CAMPAION
SECRET
:
{

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_422.jpeg ---
14-00000
i,
FROM
ACTION
INFO
F MOULAVE
WHICS)
FILE
VR. FILE
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
155/60 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIE
ADVANCE COP
☐
☐.
VSTAL COP188
Dan's
✓ .... ☐ DUNN
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PO
• CA-EU
mo
P
F1-TC
+
UNIT
TIME
☐
DDD, WES, 664, WN7, CAR, CALPRUP. DOA, DO/N3, C./OPS,
41/102, CA/PE6
SECRET 010226Z
DIR INFO MADR BERN ONVA HAGU CITE WAVE 0151
TYPIC MEVIPER
REF. WAVE DISO (~ 35346)
NOTIO
Liv
P 1 APR 65 IN 35336
IDEN; UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA, 10 SE NINTH STREET, MIAMI, FLORIDA.
SECRET
CFN
N
I

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_421.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
SECRET 1035346 PAGE 3
ADICATES INDIVIDUALS WHO OWNED ART OBJECTS MORE THAN WILLING
LET AMSCROLL RUN WITH BALL AS INDIVIDUAL EXILES DON'T WANT GET
INVOLVED IN PUBLICITY ACTIONS, POSSIBLE LITIGATION, ETC.
7. REQUEST MADR CABLE ADDRESS WHERE MUSSO CAN BE REACHED IN
SPAIN. SUGGEST AMSCROLL CONTACT MUSSO BY AIR MAIL AT THIS ADDRESS
AND OFFER WORK IN COORDINATED FASHION WITH MUSSO ON.
ARI SHIPMENT PROBLEM, MUSSO COULD COUNTER WITH OFFER SET UP
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE IF MADR FEELS AMSCROLL CONTINUATION IN
OP WOULD SIGNIFICANTLY EFFECT SENSIBILITIES OF EXILE LEADERS
EUROPE WHO HAVE SOMETHING TO CONTRIBUTE TO THIS OP,
SECRET * APPARENTLY WRONG RAF, POSTIBLY DIR 9688520
CFN
12 GAVE GUIDONGS FOR SECRET Psych op et ShipmENT CUBAN
HEIRLOOMS TO EUROVE.
.'
1
i
1
:
1
I
:
1
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_419.jpeg ---
14-00000
AFIED MESSAGE
2
SECRET
UNIT NOTIFIED
FROM
ACTION
JMWARE.
INFO
WH/C8)
14-1.20
☐
CE COPY
COPIES AV
1144
☐
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PE-
• CA-EN
UNIT
TIME
☐
C
D
VR. FILE, DDP, WEG, EEA, WHT, CR3, CALPEG, CHIPPLE 204,
DO/HS, CILOPS, C1/182
ECRE1 0102204
DIR INFO MADR BERN GNVA HAGU ZURC/CITE WAVE 01900
TYPIC MHVIPER
(~3245)
REFS: A. WAVE 9987 (NOT SENT INFO ADDRESSEES)
B. DIR 91885
C. MADR 3677
•
×
(IN 23120)
4931 (IN 33756)
D. BERN 4931
INIOR RECEIPT REF B HAD ASSIGNED AMSCROLL (IDEN) TASK
:
OF SPEARHEADING WAVE AREA PROP ACTION RE CUBAN ART SHIPMENTS
EUROPE. AMSCROLL WELL SUITED FOR THIS ROLE IN WAVE AREA DUE ITS
ESTABLISHED PRESS OUTLETS, REPUTATION FOR ACCURATE REPORTINE AN2
FACT IT CENTER ORIENTED POLITICAL GROUP WITH EASY ACCESS TADI
EXILE CIRCLES OF CONSERVATIVE PERSUASION WHO OWNED ART 055s
WHICH CONFISCATED BY GOG. INTEND CONTINUE USING AMSCROLL IN THIS
OP PARTICULARLY DURING FORMATIVE STAGES.
2. REF A PRESS RELEASE 27 MAR BY AMSCROLL CALLED FOR ALL
EXILES WAVE AREA TO FORWARD ALL INFO RE CONFISCATED ART OB.EITS
TO AMSCROLL FOR CATALOGING AND USE IN ATTEMPTS IMPOUND ART C
EUROPE BEFORE IT GOES ON SALE. LOCAL RADIO STATION'S PICKED
SECRET
:/

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_424.jpeg ---
14-00000
=
:
;
VE
WE-S
177
396671
☐
SECRET
03
33
EU
Fi
☐
141770
mo
P. FILE DDP, WH/C-8 CA. 3 CA/Hhop,
CI CI
11
Cz/ops
2183247 1 3
1
NAGU INTO DIR MADE PARI CITE WAVE 9907
=
908⑈
PARUREN MHVIPER
(N31175
N
MARIO SEIGLIE (JR), UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA.
.
FLT
:
1
1
+
n
0
Ex
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_427.jpeg ---
14-00000
14.
FROM
+MWAVE
ACTION
WHIC 8
INFO
ASSIFIED MESSAGE
TOTAL COPIES
4
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
☐
TUBED
UNIT
✓....
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
DUNNY
PP-C CA-EW
BR-RE
0000
TIME DOI
VR. FILE, TOP, WH 7, FEG, CAZ, CAPROP, DC4, DC/H3, 01/102
SECRET 102334 Z
RIOD INFO SAOP DIR TODY CITE WAVE 9407 KING HURST ACTING)
TYPIC MHVIPER PSYCH
REF: WAVE 9406/IN 7032!
.
IDEN: UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
SECRET
CFN
SECRET
20317
of
T
i
#
1
i
"
¡
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_426.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
1
:
328
IN 20328
PAGE 2
BOUGHT 185,003 TONS CUBAN SUGAR AND WILL BUY 200,000 TONS MORE;
JAPAN ALSO DELIVERING LARGE NUMBER FISHING VESSELS AND PROVIDING'
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CUBAN FISHING INDUSTRY. DETAILS ABOVE MEXICO'S
EXC/LSIOR, NEW YORK JOURNAL OF COMMERCE AND JAPAN'S OWN ECONOMIC
JOURNAL.. THESE ACTIVITIES DIRECT OPPOSITION TO OAS RESOLUTION JULY
54 WHICH BROKE DIPLOMATIC AND COMMERCIAL TIES BETWEEN CUBA AND
AVERICAN STATES AND URGED ALL OTHER COUNTRIES OF SIMILAR IDEALS ACT
ACC INGLY. THEREFORE OBVIOUS THAT INCREASE JAPAN'S TRADE WITH
COMMUNIST CUBA UNFRIENDLY ACT TOWARD OAS MEMBER NATIONS AND JAPAN
AIDING AND ABETTING ENEMY BY SUPPORTING MAINTENANCE BASE FOR
COMMUNIST AGGRESSION AND SUBVERSION OUR HEMISPHERE. SINCE BRAZIL
ONLY RECENTLY AVERTED NEAR DISASTER COMMUNIST TAKEOVER, BRAZILIANS
KNOW FULL AND ACTIVE COOPERATION NEEDED IF OUR CONTINENT TO REMAIN
FREE COMMUNIST TOTALITARIANISM. WE EXPECT BRAZIL'S PEOPLE, PUBLIC
MEXIA, BUSINESS MEN AND GOVT TO INSIST THIS TRADE MISSION
WHICH SPONSORED BY JAPANESE GOVT PROMISE CURTAIL TRAFFIC WITH
COMMUNIST CUBAN ENEMY AS PREREQUISITE FOR NEGOTIATIONS BRAZIL.
2. AMSCROLL ALSO RELEASING CONTENTS LOCAL PRESS AND WIRE REPS.
SECRET
CFN
1
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_428.jpeg ---
14-00000
}
Mirage
LOVE
5.
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
Fill
Amscreff
FROM
ACTION
INFO
JmWAVE
WH/SA-8
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
✓ SECRET
2
PERSON UNIT NOTIFIED
ADVANCE COPY
☐
TOTAL COPIES
☐
BLOT
TUBED
VR. FILE DDF, FE-6, CA-2, CA Prop
UNIT
TIME
62436431
£436231
Dm
SECRET 2323192
DIR INFO TORY CITE WAVE 3603
TYPIC MKVIPER
REF UFCW 4774
1. ANSCROLL SENT LETTER 17 FEB BASED REF CUIDANCE REQUESTING
ASSURANCES FROM DIIGATA THAT SPARE PARTS WILL NOT BE SOLD IF ORDERED
BY COC.
2. AMSCROLL USUALLY ISSUES PRESS RELEASE TO COINCIDE WITH
RECEIPT SUCH LETTERS BY ADDIES, BUT THIS CASE WILL ALLOW AMPLE TIME
FOR REPLY AND SASE PUBLICITY ON TONE OF RESPONSE.
3. POUCHING LETTER.
SECRET
:
SEOKET
MONT INF
SS SB
IOS
PERS AR
0
RPTS LOG CA
SI
Kr
HH
SIC
NS

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_425.jpeg ---
14-00000
FROW
U.R:
Fil
JMWAVE
ACTION
INFO
WHICH
VR. FILE
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
84 SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
☐
SLOTT
--
8
Zi
M&M
UNIT
TUBIO
+
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
PP-
BR-BET.
000
TIME DOI
BUNNY
(A-E-)
P
DAP, WH7, FE6, CA2, CA/PROP. D04, Do143
CIICZ
I
"
7
SECRET 102334Z
RIOD INFO SAOP DIR TOKY CITE WAVE 9406 KING HURST ACTING)
TYPIC MHVIPER PSYCH
REFS:
A. RIOD 7545 (NOT SENI SAOP) (IN 18375)
B. DIR 90763
c. WAVE 9256 (NOT SENT SAOP) (
IN 176:47)
17
28
f
EN
1. RE REF A, AMSCROLL (IDEN) SENDING CABLE 19 MAR COB FINANCE,
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES MINISTRIES, GENERAL BRAZ BRANCATO (WHO ONCE
WROTE AMSCROLL FROM PORTO ALLEGRE WITH FAVORABLE COMMENTS ON PROP
LEAFLETS), GOVERNOR LACERDA OF GUANABARA, INDUSTRIAS REUNIDAS F.
MATARAZZO (SAOP), S.A. VOTCRANTIN (SACP), FÚDICAO IUPY S.A.
(SANTA CATARINA), AMERICA FABRIL, S.A. (PIOD), FABRICA TECIDOS BANGU
(RIOD), MESBLA S.A. (RICD), JORNAL DO BRAZIL, JORNAL DO COMERCIO,
O BLOBO, O ESTADO DE SAO PAOLO, GAZETA ESTADO SAC PACLO, FOLHA DE
SAO PAOLA, O CRUZEIRO, CONJUNTURA ECONOMICA AND TRIBUNA DA IMPRESA.
SUMMARY CONTENTS FOLL:
T
CONNECTION VISIT JAPANESE TRADE MISSION
WISH CALL ATTENTION SEVERAL ASPECTS CURRENT JANANESE TRADE POLICIES
WHICH SHOULD INFLUENCE ANY DEALINGS: JAPAN-CUBA TRADE AMOUNTED
87 MILLION DOLLARS LAST YEAR FOR INCREASE 340 PERCENT; THIS YEAR JAPAN
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_429.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
TO
INFO
FROM
1
DISPATCH
Deputy Chief, WH/SA
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
SUBJECT
3 Chief of Station, JMWAVE
TYPIC/MVIPER/AMSCROLL/Operational
Forwarding of Propaganda Leaflet
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
FYI
1
POSED
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
Under separate cover is the latest AMSCROLL propaganda item in
support of the MIIVIPER program, It exploits an actual case of a firm
which literally laughed in the face of AMSCROLL protestations, and
shortly thereafter foll afoul of ODMARK with the result that it lost
its import-export license. AMSCROLL reproduced the pertinent correspond-
ence in sequence with the comment that this is one of several things
which can happen to those who trade with Communist Cuba.
✓ Andrew K. REUTEMAN
for Andrew
Attachment:
Propaganda, USC
Distribution:
3- DC, WH/SA, w/att., USC,
thuer 1
Exclufee roa
CROSS REFERENCE TO
DATE TYPED
19-120-26
DATE DISPATCHED
12 1965
9 Feb 65
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
CLASSIFICATION
UFGA 19788
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26
SECRET
7

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_43.jpeg ---
14-00000
3
**
& E C R E T
}
Chief of Station, Rio de Janeiro
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JEWAVE
DYVOUR/FBRUMEH/MHVIPER
0 Material on Trading with Cuba
References: 3. DIRECTOR 02887
B. RIO DE JANEIRO 3756
XX
Per reference A we forward by separate cover
material produced and released by the AMSCHOLL organi-
gation which we hope will be helpful in meeting your
requirement to provide ALTEPID-1 with information on
the negative aspects of commercial trading with Cuba.
}
Roger B. MARCHBANK
Attachments:
1.
Maritime 5th Colma pross releases (U/8/C)
2. Defectors statements (U/S/C)
S. AMSCHOLL Economic Reports (U/B/C)
Distribution
COS, Rio de Janeiro, w/atts, USC aut pouch.
2 – C/HH, w/o atts are
ford was to a
WE/COG, w/o atts
MAY 23 1967,
157361
Excluded s
022
de
CS COPY
28 May 67
UFGA 27672
10_1
19-12857
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_431.jpeg ---
14-00000
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA sent Shepherd
this letter regarding the "Black List".
UR
MOVIMIENTO
1
*
theb
**
*
-
M
+
is
.
114
Shepherd Export & Trading Company
the outcome.
GLAND
-
fond of
his d
and
Fx1.4mm
1" wide for th
-
and
Stat
that
1955 t
-
..
-
351774
COMMERCE
LU
Bureau of
International Commerce
W
M.tiba
*reat
SIM 90 90
.1...{
nin ta f...
of er al
The mileag
XCA.
19057
Of partica #
l of termalas!
1 T
174
.
1
TWE
The Phant 2 tan
A' wan
SHEPHERD
Castro...
continued trading with
offwi zi!, then in Parlami,
We h
parties from partiti i sportive the spots share
gig
's
_
:
!
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_433.jpeg ---
14-00000
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
☐ SECRET 74470 PAGE UZ
:
ON 25 JAN 65.
2. LOCAL PLAY LIMITED TO MIAMI NEWS SPANISH-LANGUAGE SECTION,
NORMAN DIAZ (WMET) AND MANOLO REYES (CHANNEL 4 TV), BUT TIME
MAGAZINE'S J. MALLIN REQUESTED COPY OF RELEASE AND ASKED UR KEEP
HIM POSTED DEVELOPMENTS THIS FIELD.
3. AIRMAILING COPIES PER REFS,
SECRET.
4 AMRICUTED SINTCHENT RE SOV DISENCHANTMENT CURA.
4
;

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_432.jpeg ---
14-00000
FRO:4
File
JHUNDE
ACTION
INFO
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
3: SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFICO
LON/SA 8
ADVANCE COPY
ISSUED
TOTAL COP
COPICS SAI
94
M
SLOTTED ☐ TURED
SUMMY
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
TIME
7
81
DY
VR, FILE, NOI, C^2, WEG, 004, notH S, FT, CA DP, SRT,
CJ/JC2
SECRET 05215ØZ
DIR INFO PARI COPE LOND CITE WAVE 7986
TYPIC/MHSPAWN
REF: A. DIR 82382
8. DIR 78938
1. ASSUMPTION PARA 1 REF A CORRECT.
AR
CA
MI
F.
51065 IN 74970
"
NS
SUMMARY RELEASE FOLL:
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA (UR) IN RECEIPT CONSIDERABLE EVIDENCE FROM
NUMBER SOURCES THAT SOVS MAY ANNOUNCE WITHDRAWAL ECONOMIC AID
TO CUBA AFTER PARTY MEETING 1 MAR MOSCOW AND THAT SOVBLOC OFFICIALS
STUDYING WAYS DISENGAGE ASAP SINCE CUBA NOW COSTS BLOC 12 BILLION
YEAR WHICH MORE THAN IT WORTH. RUSS LEADERS HAVE TO CONSIDER
(1) SOV UNION INTERNAL PROBLEMS WHICH NEGATIVE TO CASTRO SINCE
ACCORDING STATEMENTS BY KOSYGIN, MIKOYAN AND BREZHNEV DEC 64 USSR
FAR FROM REACHING FARM, CATTLE AND INDUSTRIAL GOALS; (2) ATTITUDE
EAST EUROPEAN SATELLITES WHICH ALSO UNFAVORABLE TO CASTRO JUDGING
FROM ARTICLES IN CZECH "LITERARNI NOVINY" AND "KULTURNI ZIVOT”
_ AND BRITISH "FINANCIAL TIMES" WHICH INDICATE COMECON CONSIDERS
FURTHER AID TO CUBA BEYOND BLOC CAPABILITIES; (3) CASTRO'S OWN
FROBLEMS, E.G. LACK DOLLAR CREDITS AND DEPRESSION IN WORLD SUGAR
MARKET WITH PRICE DROPPING FROM DEC 63 PEAK 12.6 TO 2.35 CENTS POUND
SECRET
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_434.jpeg ---
14-00000
FRCA
yxx ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO
BEF TO FILE NO
MILE RID
DESTROY
-
146
2
RET TO BRANCH - CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
S.G
E: SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
ACTION
120
P
ADVANCE COPY
ISSUED
SLOTTED
TOTAL COPIES
TUBCO
NIN
VR, FILE, PAPER WE FEG clos
✓ COPY OUMMY
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
15 1
TIME
2.
15
:
R―
SECRET 041533Z
C
Y
TYPIC MHVIPER
PROP
DIR INFO ATHE PARI LOND MADR CITE WAVE 7922 KINGHURST ACTING)
Scret 115
Jmus
R
FEB 65 73733
REF: A. DIR 77508
B. DIR 81025
1. AMSCROLL PRESS RELEASE IN ENGLISH AND SPANISH SURFACING REF
R
A MATERIAL ISSUED 3 FEB ALL LOCAL OUTLETS INCLUDING WIRE SERVICES.
R
C
P
Y
UNDER TITLE "GREEK FIRM LEARNS LESSON FROM TRADE WITH COMMUNIST CUBA"
WITH SUBHEAD "LOSES $180,000 AND HELD FOR DAMAGES BESIDES," RELEASE
ATTRIBUTED "HIGHLY RELIABLE UNDERGROUND SOURCES."
coax"
2. BEING MAILED 17 ATHE NEWSPAPERS, 2 GREEK PAPERS NEW YORK CITY
AND SEVERAL HUNDRED FREE WORLD FIRMS TRADING WITH CUBA. LOCAL AFP
STRINGER ADVISES HE CABLING GIST HIS NEW YORK OFFICE.
3. POUCHING PRESS RELEASE ALL ADDEES. WILL AIRMAIL CLIPS HQS.
RSECRET
1
CFN
FORM
1-841389
SECRET
0650LETE
PERVIOUS
PECTIONS
RL COPY.
AN "
PI
BS
PS
ABSTRACT
DEST:
ANDEX
47665
19-lac-26
RI COPY
t
R
!
-☑
(35)
P
T

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_435.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
INFO
FROM
DISPATCH
SUBJECT
Deputy Chief, WH/SA
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PHO
Chief of Station, JMWAVE ¿KK
TYPIC/Operational
AWECROLL Progress Report, December 1964
ACTION REQUIRED NEMERENCES
ACTION REQUIRED:
FYI
REFERENCE: UFGA 19181, dated 21 December 1964
A. OPERATIONAL
PROCESSING
ACCOM
ACTION
PLISHE
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JURCE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
1. During December there was considerable pressure on AMSCROLL
to join political groupings being formed by ex-Presidents Urrutia
and Pric. Fortunately, AMSCROLL was able to stay out of both without
incurring the wrath of either.
B.
PRODUCTION
2.
Although a number of new propaganda ideas were submitted by
AMSCROLL for approval, the only new item for Cuban consumption
actually printed during the month was the pony bulletin. This and
other items already on hand, including 5,000 Christmas cards, totalled
47,000 pieces which were sent in 20,000 covers to Cuba. Another
10,000 items were distributed to Latin America and Spain, and 13,700
to addressees in the U. S. Most of the two latter categories were
based on requests from religious, social, and civic organizations.
Samples of the items and a breakdown of the actual numbers of each
distributed are in the attached AMSCROLL Propaganda Section report.
3.
AMSCROLL broadcasts continued as scheduled. Chief among the
themes, which also pervaded the two issues of the AMSCROLL house organ
published during the month and the above-mentioned pony bulletin for
Cuba, were as follows:
2, The Congo in lurid detail with outrage at the Communist
hand behind the atrocities, and with scorn for the so-called neutralists
for their attitude for the rescue mission. ANSCROLL editoralized that
except for the canibalism, Congo tactics including ravage and wanton
murder are what brought Stalin, Tito, Mao, and Fidel to power.
Attachment:
(Continued)
1. Report & Propaganda Samples, USC
Distribution:
CROSS REFERENCE TO
L
De_t
3- DC, WH/SA, w/att.', USC
DATE TYPED
10-13-7%
DATE DISPATCHED
20, Jan, 65 FEB 1 1965
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA
19537
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
ath:
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
19-120-26/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_430.jpeg ---
14-00000
this is one of several
things that can happen
1
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA continues
its research in reference to the firms that
are still trading with Communist Cuba. We
are making a thorough investigation in
order to avoid mistakes, but as soon as
completed, the "Black List" will be
published and distributed throughout the
Free World.
Many firms have already realized what
trading with Communist Cuba means, and
have also taken into consideration Cuba's
credit unworthiness
ONE BILLION
DOLLARS of foreign
of foreign debt. Therefore,
these firms have backed away from this
shameful and riskful market.
->
Besides, the people of the Countries
of the Free World are sympathetic with
our cause; take as an example the boycott
started by the Venezuelan Federation of
dockworkers in accordance with the first
resolution of the "Fifth Congress of
Venezuelan Workers", lobor unions of
other nations have already followed suit.
Or take the case of Mr. Shepherd, from
Great Britian, which is illustrated in this
pamphlet.
UNIDAD REVOLUCIONARIA
44-1
10 S.E. 9 St. Miami, Fla.
Castro
Soviet masters
Adily. I have an es**
the Bank
denied all U.S. export privileges
--1120
g how heav
sarded tyrant is in he
SR its satelhter
5/c/act. # UFGA - 19788
19-120-26
to those who trade
with Communist Cuba.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_45.jpeg ---
1'751
14-00000
INDEX: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
30
ACTION
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
--
1.
14
27
GELEDES PRO ATOMATIC
DISCLASSIFICATION
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
INFO
FILE
WH/CH: ☑ RID COPY ☐ ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUBES
ISSUED
NVG WIE, ADDP, C1/OPS, C1/102 C1/0A, FI, FI/INTZ,
Wife,
UNIT
16 MAY 67 IN 68222
SECRET 161529Z CITE JMWAVE 7202
DIRECTOR
TYPIC MHVIPER
REF: RIO DE JANEIRO 3756
("~7134)
IN SELECTING INFO REQUESTED PARA 2 REF ON
NEGATIVE ASPECTS OF TRADING WITH CUBA HQS MAY WISH
CONSIDER (ANSCROLL SERIES OF ECONOMIC REPORTS ESPECIALLY
VOL II NO. Z DE 3 MARCH AND VUL II NO. 5 OF 19 DECEMBER
WHICH DISCUSS IN DETAIL SUGAR, PRODUCTION PROBLEMS.
ALSO STATEMENTS TO PRESS BY DEFECTORS SUCH AS AMRIVER-1,
AMRAIN-1 AND AMSNAKE-1 MAY BE HELO PUL. IF DESIRED
JMWAVE CAN POUCH THIS MATERIAL TO RIO.
SECRET
BT
SECRET
i
r
:
• fax
wth Fore

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_44.jpeg ---
14-00000
4 1
MUS MIND
K.W.MURPHY:fph
1 * WH/COG/CA/EW
4163
DATE: 23 MAY 19.67
CABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION
BY 22
CONFI
MESSAGE FORM
SOUTING AND/OR INITIALS - SEEN SY
TOTAL COPICS;
SECRET
30
to
☐ INDEX ☐ DESTRCT
RETURN TO..
BRANCH ☐ FILE RID
:
PER_
☐ NO INDEX
☐ FILE IN CS FILE NO. 19-120-26
WH/2068
(class bootcm)
SECRET
01/104 217
RID COPY
INFO:
FILE
. WH8 CAZ CA/PRES
[picat
13
J
SANTIAGO INFO JMWAVE
:TYPIC MHSPAWN AMSCROLL
416
idate and
(reference number)
24 794177
CITE DIRECTOR
04241
7
7
AN
WH/C/CA:
ABSTRACT ✗
REFS:A. UFGA-27416 (20 APRIL 1967)
B. SANTIAGO 4230 (IN 58430)
HQS DEFERS TO STATION JUDGEMENT AS TO VALUE PROP PLAY IN CHILE
OF REF A PAPER. HOWEVER, WISH TO POINT OUT THAT PAPER QUOTES FIGURES
AND ARRIVES AT CONCLUSION ALREADY WELL KNOWN AND ACCEPTED BY
“INDIVIDUALS KNOWLEDGEABLE OF SUGAR INDUSTRY.
Def
-
Esterles
WILLIAN V. BROE
C/WED
RELEASING OFFICER
END OF MESSAGE
COORDINATING OFFICERS
la
EAR
19-120-26
23. May 67
WILLIAMSON
AC/WH/COG
AC/W
GROUP 1
Extinded from automatio
warding and
AUTHENTICATING
OFFICER
SECRET
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED.
COPY NO.
R
www.
K

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_437.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
FORM
5.60 53a
(40)
CLAPPIFICATION
CONTINUATION OF
_
DISPATCH
SECRET
III. FINANCIAL
Salarios.....
Operational expenditures
IV.
FUTURE PLANS
TOTAL
11
DISPAT
SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 19537
$4,745.00
9.180.75
$13,025.75
-
--
-
7. In process at month's end were a two-year-analysis of the
campaign against free-world shipping-to-Cuba, noting gains made and the
job still to be done, for publication in booklet form; a new leaflet
for Cuba showing how personal and family security are endangered more
by not doing anything than by taking whatever steps against the regime
are possible depending upon the opportunities which arise; and a
leaflet for Latin American distribution showing on a map of Cuba the
A new departure in
reported sites for the training of terriorists.
propaganda to Cuba will be the printing of the backs of all future
leaflets in script form so that they will appear to be handwritten
Heretofore AMSCROLL has
letters if viewed through the envelopes.
been enfolding other printed material in a simulated handwritten
wrappor, but now each item will have its own "personal letter" built
in to save valuable weight and bulk in the covers while still hopefully
deceiving Cuban postal authorities.
1
↑
!
for
Si
Andrew K. REUTEMAN
CLASSIFICATION
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
SECRET
PAGE NO.
CONTINUED
19-120-26
3 of 3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
"~7
DISPATCH
Chief, WH
CLASSIFICATION
1+
WH/COG
PROCESSING
ACTION
SECRET
PRO-
POSED
MARKED FO
✗
NO INDEXING
✓CCOM
PLISHED
INFO
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE ANT
0
SUBJECT TYPIC/Operational
ONLY QUALIFIED]
HEADQUARTERS FRON
CAN ILOGE KING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
Receipt of Information from Unidentified Source within Cuba
ACTION REQUIRED · REFERENCES
Action Required:
Reference:
FYI
None
1. On 27 March 1967, a letter from Cuba was received at
the postal address given by the radio program of AMSCROLL.
The letter had been mailed in Habana on 4 March 1967 and the
contents included three photos of an unidentified individual
_ and one photo each of individuals identified as Reynaldo
*IRSULA Brea and Antonio FERNANDEZ Fernandez. A note which
was included stated that henceforth the sendor would identify.
himself as *'Pancrasio". He indicated that if it was desired
receipt of his letter could be mentioned on the AMSCROLL
radio program but that never should any mention of the
contents be mentioned as this could reveal his identity to
the DSE. Pancrasio stated his help would not be much but
that his letters might contain information which could be
of value. He wrote that he could not go into detail as
he was unable to spend much time at the typewriter.
Pancrasio concluded by saying the photos of Antonio and
Reynaldo were in the hands of a security agent who had
orders to find them. They had both been fugitives for a
long time. The other photo (in triplicate) was of a
Canadian citizen whose passport was retained by the DSE and
was reported as lost for an unexplained motive.
2. On 10 April 1967, the message from Pancrasio was
ac nowledged by radio and he was thanked for his letter and
told to continue his correspondence.
3. On 21 April 1967, a second letter from Pancrasio
was received via Key West, Florida. The letter had been
Attachment U/S/C (atl)
Copies of info received
Distribution:
Distrib
-
WH/COG
CS COPY
Stanley B. JERSAWIT
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
9 May 67 MAY 11 1967
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
RE
:
CROSS REFERENCE TO
C2JVP 1
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET.
UFGA-27543
HEADQUARTERS F¨L NUMBER

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_436.jpeg ---
14-00000
FORM
60
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATI
ICATION
SECRET
fa
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 19537
b. AMSCROLL optimistically sees the start of a counter offen-
sive against the rampages of Communism in Latin America. Examples
cited were Castello Branco's action in Goaiz Province, Brazil;
Venezuelan Army operations in the Andes; Panamanian preparations to
control agitation on the anniversary of the Canal riots; Argentine
Foreign Minister Zavala's public denunciation of Soviet colonialism
in Cuba; Jagan's defent at the polls in Guiana; and "Operation
Ayacucho, a seven-nation military maneuver against an "imaginary
target which has Latin American Communists screaming "foul!"
"
C. "Che" Guevara's statements before the UN and during his
television interview contrasted with quotations from previous speeches,
especially his current whining for trade openings with the U. S. as
opposed to past claims that U. S. sugar purchases kept Cuba in a state
of colonialism. Much was mado of the remark of the Nicaraguan dele-
gate to the UN that Guevara's address on behalf of Cuba was a Russian
speech with an Argentine accent. It was also noted that "Che", admitted
Cuba's support of the terrorism in Venezuela.
d. Cuba's worsening economic situation was, as heretofore, a
constant theme. Featured this month wore the obvious failures of the
foraging trips of Carlos Rodriguez and "Che" Guevara, and a host of
specific examples of material shortagos admitted by Cuban public media.
8. The Martinez Sanchez suicide and the lack of precise details,
expecially in its aftermath, got considerable attention in AMSCROLL
propaganda, along with other notes on GOC strife.
f. The Sino-Soviet rift was expected to continue, according to
AMSCROLL, and the situation does not bode well for Castro's relations
with the now Kremlin leaders. Examples taken from press clippings.
8. The CTV boycott against free-world ships trading with Cuba
was favorably noted as another facet of the tightening of the noose
around Fidel's neck.
h. End-of-year broadcasts centered on the decline of Communisme
after a half century it still fails to improve the living standards of
the peoples engulfed, but instead increases terror and oppression to
forge the populations into automatons for use in the realization of
its mad dream of world conquest.
4. Among letters received during the month was a request from
Palo Alto, California for a complete set of AMSCROLL publications for
the Hoover Institute's archives on world revolutions.
5. AMFRAME-1, who is now second man in the AMSCROLL Propaganda
Section by dint of his demonstrated imagination and initiative, came
up with a proposal during the month to test reaction to printed
materials being sent to Cuba. Implemented immediately, it consists
of a small coupon which accompanies each item mailed to 15,000
addressees on a rotating basis each month. The total is divided into
four groups for sample purposes, each group being asked to respond to
requests for general, readily available information on the basis of
different stimuli, either to have the respondent's code name announced
over the radio or just listed among the "many" others who are contri-
buting to the effort to overthrow the Castro regime. Theoretically,
the assistance would be more fully acknowledged after the liberation.
On the basis of results achieved during the first few months, the
system will be refined until the most successful method for testing
Cuban audience reaction is found. A report will be submitted when
sufficient returns are in. The AMSCROLL Propaganda Section report,
attached, contains further details and a sample of the coupon.
6. We were pleased to receive EGFA 43043 which credited AMSCROLL
propaganda with a minor MHVIPER score on a West German firm which was
doing business with Cuba. Evidently a number of free-world firms are
disturbed in the same way by AMSCROLL's Mabre-rattling letters on the
possibility of a black list. A report is being prepared analyzing
replies from target firms.
53α USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PAGE NO.
✗
2 of 3
CONTINUED

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
5°
7
t
INDER: ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. 14-17-2 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐)
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
ACTION
INFO
24
FTOT
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
GROUP 1
Z
TIC
EXTELA.COM, AND
ICATION
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
UNIT
TIME
☐ ISSUED ☐ SLOTTED ☐ TURED
WH/C. G-8 ✓ RID COPY
ILE, VR, WH-T, CA. 2, CA/PROP, FI
WH-Y-CA.
WAVE
SECRET 1221512 CITE JMWAVE 7155
DIRECTOR INFO RIO DE JANEIRO, SAO PAULO
TYPIC MMCPAW: AMSCROLL AMOT
REF JMWAVE 7135 (N65400)
AN
- STORY BASED UPON STUDY DISCUSSED REF PUBLISHED
MIAMI HERALD 12 MAY ENTITLED "SUGAR MARVEST IN CUBA
MAY BE BEST SINCE '61. ALSO AP FILED STORY WITH
ITS NEW YORK OFFICE IDENTIFIED AS PL759PED MAY 11.
AIRMAILING ADDRESSEES BOTH ACCOUNTS.
SECRET
SECRET
S
12 MAY 67 IN 6 6 358
166/2E6C.
..ET
J
B
19-120-26
12 May 1967
Hype
!

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000-
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
T
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-27543
mailed from Habana on 13 March and was directed to Guillermo
ALFONSO, 649 William Street, Key West. Typed on
Typed on one of the
two sheets of paper forwarded by Pancrasio was a note saying
this was lotter number four from Pancrasio and requesting
Guillermo ALFONSO to forward the papers to the same postal
address which he had previously utilized. Copies of the
contents of this letter are attached under separate cover.
The one paper, dated 27 September 1961, appears to be a
list of Costa Ricans who visited Cuba under the auspices of
ICAP.
The second paper appears to be a list of Brazilians
who visited Cuba, probably in mid 1960 when Janio QUADROS made
a visit to Cuba as part of his presidential campaign in
Brazil.
4. On 2 May 1967, a JMWAVE Officer visited Guillermo
ALFONSO in an effort to identify Pancrasio and develop
sufficient information to evaluate his information and
determine the extent of his access. ALFONSO claimed he
had no idea as to the identity of Pancrasio and was unable
to suggest possible candidates from his relatives in Cuba, ·
former work associates, classmates or neighbors. ALFONSO
had retained the envelop from Cuba which contained Pancrasio's
second message and a short message to ALFONSO. The note to
ALFONSO stated that Pancrasio had received ALFONSO's name
and address from some unidentified individual and that it was
requested that ALFONSO forward the contents of the letter to
the AMSCROLL address which was enclosed. ALFONSO was
cautioned not to mention anything concerning the matter to
anyone, especially to relatives in Cuba.
to relatives in Cuba. Pancrasio stated
this was his second letter (not fourth as indicated on the
material which was forwarded on by ALFONSO) and that the
first had been sent direct to the AMSCROLL address. It was
stated this was the first letter by which ALFONSO would
a serve as intermediary and that other letters would come
at infrequent intervals. Pancrasio had decided to use an
intermediary address as the AMSCROLL address was too well
known. Pancrasio concluded his note by saying that he
preferred to remain anonymous and that he would be remaining
in Cuba for two more years. In addition to the above cited
message, the letter to ALFONSO contained a calling card with
the name Dr Luc B. INNOCENT, President of the Haitian
Revolutionary Movement. On the back of the card was typed in
Spanish "without comment".
5. JMWAVE traces on FERNENDEZ, IRSULA and ALFONSO are
negative. INNOCENT, according to HZPA-12507, dated 2 August
1962, is a Haitian terrorist, Fidelista, who was planning
to enter Panama from Columbia.
6. ALFONSO was instructed to forward any mail received
from Pancrasio in an expeditious manner and JMWAVE will
follow any leads obtained which might help to identify
Pancrasio in order to develop him into a more productive
source of information.
*USE PREVIOUS EDIȚION.
Starte
B
Stanley B. JERSAWIT
I
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
CONTINUED
PAGE NO
2..
44
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
**
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SECRET
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division
Administrative/TYPIC/Amendment of MOC's
REFERENCE A. LFGT 20355
6. UNGA 28653
C. UFGW 6778
1. Action on the Reference A (A&FRAME-1) and Reference b
(AMSCROLL-3) requests for amendment of ACC's is being held in abey-
ance pending recept of your comments on the AMFRAME activity as
requested in Reference C.
2. In the meantime we would appreciate additional information
explaining the increased compensation for AMSCROLL-3. Reference A
adequately explained the increase for AsFRAME-1, but reference B
contained none of the comments normally submitted with this type of
request.
Distribution:
3 - C08, JMWAVE
1 - WH/C/ REG
1 Chrono
1
-
-
-
WH/6 (Admin)
AMFRAME-1
1 - AMSCROLL-3
1 - WH/Contracts
George L. TRANGER
1
UFGS 10024
63 November 1967
SECRET
WH/Contracts
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_51.jpeg ---
14-00000
let
38
2
2
1
*
44324
11
:
Dr. Luc. B. Innocent
PRESIDENT
DU MOUVEMENT REVOLUTIONNAIRE HAITIEN
i
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_52.jpeg ---
".
.
"
i
SIN COMENTARIO
!
"720
14-00000

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_49.jpeg ---
14-00000
Sept. 27, 1961
PRLACIO: IZ GRUPO TEL ICAP JE COSTA RICA it
-
Maria Piquersa
E
Alicia Calida
Felicia Rojas
la 0.-Ivette Harren
Julia Kriquez-111. 1. Sarcia
Luz 1. Hernandez Rosaliena
Eleng Hora e Hijos ---
Luis ¿cevedo
-
Kamen Blanco
Hisze) Barrantes
Edwin Calderon
Manuel Campos
-
-
Fra cisco Tolaños
-
-
Luis Caupos
Gustavo Cardenas
Mariand Carpos - Rigoberto Carmina
Fernando Chavez
-
Gonzalo Sierra
Luis Cordas - Luis Romades
Cabino Tallas - Fernando Fonseca
rafael Grandes-Honorio Monters
Wilfred Jolason Alfonso Rodrig
Mariano Monje - Jorge
-
je
Felix Quesada Palter vero
-
*
Alise Sentai
Arnaldo Vendors - 4
Ingotora - Redolfo Golang
--
4-
-
Manuel Romero-Tixoslobos Risalartd Fraviur
Rigoberto Via Hoctor Infora -
Anibale Parrus - Maquel Volis
Hanuel Sanchez
-
Perer Fibell
-
Jorge Coto
-
Herrill -Jorge Rodriquez
Marco ulio Horera
--
1920
-1003
_---1601
-
-1002
-------1603
Qui
-1004
1605
-1607
--1603
01609
--3610
-1611
-1612
1613
1614
001615
163.5
-1317
1610
1619
-1620
-1627-1621
-1622
-1623
1624
oxaequawoɔ us suf
VIHYNOIOHTOASS GVCINI NOIONGLY
* q euopa à à dette, e cÁÐA SU OU ONNELLING HOAPH JOS
exo el a
YI Twe
0760 opty
tuossejp equainais electSIMONEN MO *suoŢu@quy
set opiatoada in taqsy en cutzen e 'opstdoute op 7 ou e715
ORANTRIMS NOT EV
4961
sleat.
1UFGA - 27543
CS COPY
19-120-2-6
* J.
2

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_50.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
your*,
i
☑
DELEGACION FEL BRASIL
Capt. Vicentre Ricalo Palais
Pr. Janie Madres, D. Elca Quadros, Srta. Dirce Maria Quadros,
Sra. Ir Quadros
Senador Alfonso Arines e Senhora
Deputado Foulo de Tarso e Senhora
Deputado Adancto Dicio Cardoso
Deputado Seixas Doria
Peputado renuisco Juliao e Senhora¨
Reputado Castilho Cabral
Sr Auguste Narzagao
Dr Jono Fantas
Sr Helio Fernandez
Sr Muniz Bandeira
Sr. Murilo Nele Filho
Sr Luis Antonio Villas Boas
Sr Pinheiro Tenos
Sr Rui Marcucci
Sr Marcio Aves
Sr Carlos Castelo Branco
Sr Ruben Prama
Sr Carlos Nesquit?
Sr Clodemi Nis
--- he ente
cuba 000040
1509
1510/11/12
1533/14
1506
1520
1521
1503
1516
1508
1507
:
1519
1212
1508
1522
1722
1705
1720
1515
1720
1110
1706
Depautado Marilo Costa Rego e Senhora
1502
Sr Jesuino Interio Dávila
1008
Sr Emir Noqueira
1108
Sr Jose Passos
Sr Elias Raid
Sr Jose Costa
Sr Saule Rates
Sr Fernando Sabine
Sr Jao Batista Costejon
Dr Milton Fernandez
Sr Milton Santos
Deputado Juracy Magalhaes Jr
Sr Oswaldo Pereira Legey
Sr Carlos Yerr
Sr Joao Nancel Conrado Ribeiro
Sr Jose Carlos de Moraes
1003
13.09
1213
1108
1501
1518
1109
1517
1517
1001
1001
1: 2
1: 5
Sr Walter Farboxa
1706
TRIPULACION
Sres Arthur Portofe e Heitor Tider
1719
Sres Antonio Jose Schittini Finto e Gilberto A Salomoni
1709
Srta Marly Moreira Peter
1721
Sres. Paulino Lira e Jose Imperator
1208
Sres Leonardo ; Spitzer e Beniamin Bondarczuk
Sres Lindolfo Mentenegro e Aldo Rodriguez Neto
1220
1223
!
cord d
14

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_53.jpeg ---
14-00000
14
IDEX: ☐ YES ☐ NO
LASSIFY TO FILE NO.
4-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☐
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
G
ACTION
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
E
TOTAL COPIES
GROUP 1
EXCLUDES PROM AUTOMATIC
ACEM AND
OLCLARIFICATION
TUBE
ADVANCE COPY
☑ RID COPY
☐ ISEUES ☐ SLOTTED ☐ T
FILE, JB WH18,
CAZ, CAI PROP, 5
Pro
REPRODUCT CONCEBITED
CA
MO
RS
55
ESEC
BY
SECRET 112305Z CITE JMWAVE 7135
DIRECTOR INFO RIO DE JANEIRO, SAO PAULO
TYPIC MHSPAWN AMSCROLL AMOT
REFERENCE JMWAVE 6970 (59428)
ACTION"
1. STUDY DISCUSSED PARA 1 REF RELEASED 5 MAY.
ONLY PICK UP SEEN BY STATION WAS STORY IN DIARIO LAS
AMERICAS 9 MAY. CLIP AIRMAILED TO ADDRESSES. HOW-
EVER AFP FILED STORY WITH NEW YORK OFFICE 9 MAY.
FORWARD COPY TEXT WHEN AVAILABLE TO STATION,
ASSURED BY LOCAL AP OFFICE THAT STORY WRITTEN BUT AS
OF 11 MAY NOT FILED.
WILL
AMFRAME-1
2. COPIES AMSCROLL STUDY POUCHED HQS BY TM-928341
ON 10 MAY. AIRMAILING COPY TO INFO ADDRESSES.
SECRE I
Ken phy
!
A ULEGA 27517
AP FILE
T
SECRET
*TIT

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_54.jpeg ---
j
. d'
14-00000
+
INDEXS ☐ YES ☑ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID
19-120-26 PLASSIFIED MESSAGE F
RET. TO BRANCH
DESTROP ☐ SIG.
ACTIO
INFO
28
ping
WA/COFT
SECRET
PERSON UNIT NOTIFIED
☑ RID COPY
TOTAL COPIES
ADVANCE COPY
22
R. Aulen
ExLanta PROM AUTOMATIC
BONFIGLAZIENU AND
DECLAIMTICATION
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
☐ ISSUED ☐ ☐ SLOTTED
FILE UR, WHP, CAL, CA/PROP
SECRET 102137Z CITE A WAVE 7103
TUDED
ITED ☐ "
AN 14
8.5
UNIT
TIME
BY
ABSTRACT ✗
4432
10 MAY 67 IN 6 4 4 32
SANTIAGO INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC AMSCROLL
EN
REFERENCE SANTIAGO 4230
58340)
"
1. JMWAVE PROCEEDING PER PARA 3 REF. STUDY
BEING DISTRIBUTED TO AMSCROLL LIST 10 MAY. WILL
AIRMAIL SANTIAGO SPANISH TRANSLATION WITH CHARTS.
WILL APPRECIATE CLIPS INCLUDING EDITORIALS YOU
MAY BE ABLE ARRANGE.
2. REQUEST YOU DEFER PASSING MATERIAL UNTIL
17 MAY OR LATER IN ORDER ALLOW TIME FOR ARRIVAL
OF AMSCROLL MAILING.
SECRET
☐ BI
SECRET
19-120-26
10 May 67
:
"
:
+
3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000
"
i
:
TADEX: ☐ YES ☐ NO
PASSIFY TO FILE NO. 1 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
¡-REF TO FILE NO.
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO BRANCH ☑
DESTROY ☐ SIG.
25/21
ACTION
INFO
WH/C068
E
SECRET
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
TOTAL COPIES
Caraf
4
SECLUDED PRE AUTOMATIC
MANGADING AND
DST LANSIFICATION
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
5
ADVANCE COPY.
UNIT
TIME
BY
☑ RID CORY
☐ SLOTTER ☐ TURCE
FILE UR WHS, FI, CAD, CA/PROP, 08/04, FI/INTZ, C1, C1/OPS, C1/1C3588,
WAVE
SECRET 032225Z CITE JMWAVE 6970
DIRECTOR INFO RIO DE JANEIRO, SAO PAULO
TYPIC MHSPAWN AMSCROLL. AMOT
REF
DIRECTOR 97866
45942
RE
PS DEST
ABSTRACT ✗
INDEX
1. RE REQUEST PARA 2 REF CURRENT STATISTICAL AMSCROLL STUDY -
COMPLETED 3 MAY INDICATE 1967 HARVEST TO BE MORE IN NEIGHBORHOOD
6,1 MILLION METRIC TONS WHICH IN LINE WITH RESPONSIBLE ANALYSES
HENCE PREFER USE
1CF, CZARNIKOW-RIONDA) AVAPLABLE TO AMSCROLL.
AVAPLABLE
THEIR CONCLUSIONS BUT IN DISCUSSION SECTION WILL REFER SAVORABLY
TC SUMMARY SECTION OF UFG-8867. THIS WILL ALSO AVOID SECURITY
☐
FACTOR OF USING PRECISE AMOT CONSLUSIONS. THIS STUBY WILL BE
RELEASED BY AMSCROLL 5 MAY. WILL ADVISE PER REF OF WIRE SERVICE
(AND OTHER PICKUP.
21 AMOT STUDY OF 25 APRIL OF RECENT RISE OF SUGAR PRICE AND
THEIR PROPOSALS TO COUNTER ROLE OF SPECULATORS FORWARDED TM928256
ON 2 MAY. DRAFT OF AMSCROLL STUDY DISCUSSED ABOVE BEING
FORWARDED PRIORITY POUCH 4 MAY. ALSO FORWARDING PERTINENT
EXTRACTS OF SUGAR LETTERS FROM MERRILL LYNCH, CZARIKOW-RIONDA AND
C. CZARNIKOW, LTD WHICH GERMAINE TO AMOT PROPOSALS.
30
AS THESE AND OTHER STUDIES REACH DIFFERENT CONCLUSIONS ONSE
1
143
-
}
19-120- 2. C
4 May 1867

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_56.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
Y
i
PAGE 2 JMWAVE 6970 SÉCRET
0 30
SECRET
SIZE OF SUGAC CROP AND DUE ABSENCE HERE OF RELIABLE INFO ON SUCH KEY
FACTORS AS EXTENT, IF ANY, TO WHICH SOVIET UNION WILL RELEASE CUBA
FROM ITS COMMITMENT TO PROVIDE USSR WITH 4,000,000 TONS THIS
YEAR (JMWAVE IN NO POSITION TO EVALUATE MERITS OF EITHER CONCLUSION)
WE DEFER TO HQS FOR EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTING AMOT PROPOSALS.
IN ADDITION SUCH ASSETS AS AMSCROLL, AMHIM, ETC.
AMRAIN-1 OR AMSNAKE-1 MIGHT PREPARE STUDIES ATTRIBUTING THEIR
INFO TO PERSONAL EXPERIENCE AND RECENTLY ARRIVED RIFUGEES.
SECRET
SECRET
By
-
124
: .
19. WANT
07 ANW
}
::
+1-2

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_57.jpeg ---
-
14-00000
+INGTON 027
I
SECRET
DISP NO
-
TELEPOUCH
FOOT-13169
FILE NO
-
NONE
DATE
3 MAY 1967
INDEXING
-
NONE
MICROFILM
-
NONE
TO
CHIEF OF STATION, JMWAVE
INFO
CHIEF, FE DIVISION
FROM
SUBJECT
->
CHIEF, WH DIVISION
T
ACTION
she
REFERENCE
-
CHIEF OF STATION, OKINAWA
TRANSFER OF JMWAVE ADVANCE TO OKINAWA FOR
ACCOUNTING
SEE PARA 3
UFGT-19178, DTD 13 APRIL 67
1. CONTENTS REF AND ATTACHMENTS NOTED AND REFERRED TO
REBHOLTZ WHOSE COMMENTS FOLLOW--
A. BOTH AMOUNTS ON VOUCHER 8511 PROBABLY PASSED AS ONE
SUM TO AMBLEAK/1 WHO MAY HAVE SIGNED SINGLE RECEIPT FOR
$1,500.00 RATHER THAN RECEIPTING $1,000.00 AND $500. ØØ
SEPARATELY.
RE-EXAMINATION APPROPRIATE FILES ON THIS ASSUMPTION
MAY SOLVE MYSTERY.
B. ANY OUTSTANDING ADVANCES THIS MATTER WOULD HAVE BEEN
TRANSFERRED TO SUCCEEDING CASE OFFICER GORDON R. HAWLOTT
THROUGH FORMAL MEMO WHICH WAVE FINANCE MUST HAVE HAD PRIOR
REBHOLTZ' CLEARING STATION. EXTRA COPY MAY BE IN AMSCROLL FILES
/
C. SINCE AMBLEAK/1 WOLADY CITIZEN ALTHOUGH, THOUGHT
BY SOME ASSOCIATES A PBRUMEN EXILE/, HE MIGHT BE APPROACHED
DIRECTLY TO ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT AND DETAIL EXPENDITURES MADE
WITH FUNDS IN QUESTION.
D. REBHOLTZ' RECOLLECTION PURPOSE OF ADVANCE WHICH
WAVE 1782 CITED ON VOUCHER AS AUTHORIZATION MAY CONFIRM, WAS
DEPOSIT ON LEASE, RENOVATION AND REPAIRS HEIRLOOM COVER OFFICE
IN FASHIONABLE AREA OF CITY. CLEARED WOLADY REALTOR WHO MADE
ARRANGEMENTS, COPY OF LEASE IN JMWAVE FILES, PERSONAL OBSERVATION™
SECRET TELEPOUCH FCOT-13169 PAGE ONE
EGE
-1
7111

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_58.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
-
+
1
Y
☐T TELEPOUCH
FCOT-13169 PAGE TWO
„DELLING IN PROCESS BY HAWLOTT AND REBHOLTZ / INCLUDING
INSTALLATION AIR CONDITIONER THROUGH WALL/, AMBLEAK/ UTILIZATION
OFFICE AND POSSIBLE VISITS BY CLEARED WOLADY ATTORNEY AS CONSULTANT
ON HEIRLOOM ACTIVITY PLUS OTHER SUCH INDICATIONS SHOULD PROVIDE
AMPLE EVIDENCE MONEY PASSED AND EXPENDED AS AUTHORIZED.
2. IF ABOVE LEADS CANNOT BE FOLLOWED UP EFFECTIVELY,
SUGGEST REBHOLTZ' CERTIFICATION BE ACCEPTED THAT TO BEST HIS
KNOWLEDGE FUNDS PASSED AMBLEAK/1 FOR APPROVED OPERATIONAL
PURPOSE. NOTE ADVANCE MADE 11 MAY 65 FOR ACCOUNTING ON OR BEFORE
11 JUNE 65, AND THAT REBHOLTZ ON ACTIVE DUTY AT JMWAVE UNTIL
31 JULY/ ALTHOUGH REF STATES DEPARTURE APPROX 1 JUNE/. TIME
FACT OR SUGGEST SUBSTANTIVE ACCOUNTING RENDERED WITHIN NORMAL
DATE LIMIT SINCE OVERDUE NOTICE EVIDENTLY NOT ISSUED EVEN 45 DAYS
BEYOND DUE DATE/WHICH REBHOLTZ SAYS WAS FIRM SOP AT JMWAVE/.
3. PLS ADVISE ASAP SINCE REBHOLTZ ETA 8 JUNE PCS TOKYO
. STATION AND WISH TO CLEAR THIS ITEM RATHER THAN TRANSFER IT AGAIN.
VICTOR J. SANDVOLD
END
DISTRIBUTION
2 COS, JMWAVE/VIA TELEPOUCH/
r
O
CHIEF, FẸ DIVISION/VIA TELEPOUCH/
CHIEF, WH DIVISION/VIA TELEPOUCH/
SECRET
TELEPOUCH
FCOT-13169 PAGE TWO
BT
1
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
of
Amscroll 048
Culfetorn Hemisphere Lavicion
Approval of Modified CA Pr
NOTION REQUIRED: Th
850
1 On 8 Ceptember 1907 INLOT approved a states report on
U. C.-Label MOFACT-purported An- Operations. The report
comuned the following specific propolis;
a. Termination of support to AMPOLL. by 01 December 2007
(with responsibility for production of code did for dutribution
Curoad to be acuigned to anchor project).
49
D. Termination of support to AMG prior to 31 December 1007
But with a proviso nuthorizing retention of "ber three" aponta la
order to maintain meccs to and fluence along Latin America
laboradors and organizations.
3
c. Termination of support to A on or about 01 August
1067 but with a provico for retention of contacts with two principal
ejenis in order to maintain access to important sports officials
and organizations.
d. Termination of support to RATIO on 30 September 1067.
"
1
c. Continuation of support to AL for the production of
Lpanish language materials wind i, at contanoes out
the B.C. The following ontract from the report com
apoctite action requirement:
11
"
"Elle Akti is registered as a prefit-muling commercial
enterprice and has a legitimate monthly income of about 1, 600; .
However, the Cuban mancup of its chat, the nature of its output,
and its modest income from non-NOFACT cources would strongly
+
T
the
:
2
UFGW 0000
SECRET
21 September 1007
13-10-00
1
-
RI
-
Chrono
-
WH/REG/C
1 - WH/CCC/CA
C/WH/COG/CA Paul E. Oberst
(chrono)
po
0790

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_59.jpeg ---
14-00000
>
BRANCH ☐
INDEXT ☐ YES ☐ NO
CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.
X-REF TO FILE NO.
19-21 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
FILE RID ☐ RET. TO
DESTROY ☐ SIG. 24ife
TOTAL COPIES
26
SECRET
GROUP
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIS
PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED
**
25
REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED
ACTION
INFO
FILE
WH/CG-8
ADVANCE COPY
UNIT
TIME
BY
RID COPY
☐ ISSUED ☐ SLOTTED
☐ SLOTTED ☐ TUDED
AN (PI/
28
4, VR, WH-8, CA- 2, CA/PROP, CA/0-4
SECRET #22125Z CITE SANTIAGO CHE CERCEDED (THILLEN ACTING)
JY WAVE INFO DIRECTOR
TYPIC MHSPAWN AMSCROLL
ABSTRAC
2 MAY E7 : 58340
REF:
UFGA 27416 (20 APRIL 1967)
1974 19
i
Dan fis
1. REFERENCE IS AN EXCELLENT PAPER THAT SHOULD SERVE OUR
PROPAGANDA PURPOSES WELL IN CHILE ESPECIALLY SINCE THE GOC SEEMS
TO DESIRE A SOFTENING OF ITS PREVIOUSLY HARD ANTI-CUBA LINE.
2. WE CAN REPLAY THE ARTICLE IN ITS ENTIRITY IN FUNERAL-
OR PROBABLY PLACE A SUMMARY OF IT IN THE FUAMBER-1 SUNDAY
SUPPLEMENT. CA MORNING TABLOID OF SOME 200,000 CIRCULATION ON
SUNDAYS, VERY BIG FOR CHILE). IN EITHER CASE ATTRIBUTION IS
NO PROBLEM SINCE EITHER OF THEM WILL PLACE IT WITH OR WITHOUT
ATTRIBUTION.
3. THUS, IF IT SERVES YOUR PURPOSES WOULD SUGGEST THAT
AMSCROLL PUBLISH IT FOR PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION AFTER WHICH YOU CAN
SEND US THE SPANISH VERSION WITH THE CHARTS TOGETHER WITH A LIST
OF CHILEAN FIRMS IT WAS SENT TO AND WE WILL ARRANGE FUBLIC
DISTRIBUTION AS NOTED ABOVE. MIGHT ALSO BE POSSIBLE SPIN OFF SOME
EDITORIALS BY OTHER ASSETS EITHER BEFORE OR AFTER GIVING IT FULL
TREATMENT.
SECRET
BT
SECRET
19-120-26
2. May 67-
*
7

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
B 30CY
ROYAL GREEK EMBASSY
WASHINGTON. D. C.
13
SEP.CQUAIT:
ugA-27447
26 Ogr. 67
:
↑
April 17, 1957
:
Movimiento Unida Revolucionaria
10 S.E. 9th Street
Kiami, Fla. 33131.
Dear Sirs,
of
Would you kindly send us 2 copies
your number 6 Political Notebook Series
The Maritime Fifth Column (Suplement).
Thanking you in advance,
Truly yours,
Fkurasidé
I.Kerasidia
Secretary.
sleał
au. I UFGA- 27447
CS COPY
19-120-26
- *
VA VAN VA TOPSTUYVAROS

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_60.jpeg ---
14-00000
N
*!
A+T
portif A
TO
INFO
FROM
DISPATCH
Chief, Western Hemisphere
Chief of Station, Athens
Chief, NE
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT TYPIC/AMSCROLL
CLASSIFICATION
C/WH
PROCESSING
SECRET
PRO-
POSED
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARKED FOR INDEXING
KNF
XXXX NO INDEXING ALQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDE (ING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
○ Request from Greek and Spanish Embassies for AMSCROLL Publications
ACTION REQUIRED · REFERENCES on Shipping
Action Required:
Required: None, FYI
A+
1.
We forward by separate cover a copy of a letter from the
Royal Greek Embassy in Washington addressed to AMSCROLL together
with a copy of the requested publication. AMSCROLL answered the
request by return mail and took the opportunity to include more
recent material published by AMSCROLL which discussed Greek ships
and Cuba. All of this material had earlier been sent the addressees
and, further, had been sent the list discussed in UFGA-26541
(8 December 1966). We are also including in the separate cover
attachment an article based upon AMSCROLL material that appeared
in the American Marine Engineer.
2. On 27 April the Spanish Embassy in Washington telephoned
AMSCROLL to request one copy each of the January and February
1967 AMSCROLL Studies of Free World Shipping with Cuba. The
Embassy explained that its file of this publication was complete
except for these two issues.
i
Roger E. Marcaban
ŵr MARK F. EFFIELD
Attachment:
As stated, uscates)
Distribution
3-C/WH, w/att, usc
2-COS, Athens, w/att. use - To Out Povel
2-WH/COG, w/att. usc
2-C/NE, w/o/att. 200
w!oat.
joanzarila whore.
N
CS COPY.
CROSS REFERENCE TO
.
CLASSIFICATIC +
SECRET
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
28 April 67 MAY 1 1967
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-27447
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26
.
19-120-26/3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_64.jpeg ---
;
-
2
14-00000
**
77777-
- 2 -
)
7
(it rhymes in Spanish, of course): Where would Raúl be? Is he out cutting
-
cane - cr viciously murdering Cubans – or hiding insido a trunk? Where might
he be?
maybe he's got the "shakes"
-
what could have happened to Raulito?
-
or was abducted by (eloped with) a Congolese? (This is a reference to the old
Cuban joke about Raúl being a homosexual and having a preference for husky Congo-
lese).
(4) Box: CUBAN! Help the fight against the tyranny. Pass this issue on to
your friends and trusted acquaintances. Report to us any news that might be in-
teresting (we give our P.O. Box No.). We welcome your criticisms, comments and
suggestions.
→
PAGE THREE:
(1) Continuation of front-page story on Collazo.
(2) CASTRO TO BE ACCUSED BY REDS: a brief story on the announced plans of the
Venezuelan Communists to charge Castro with meidling and promoting fractionalism,
at a forthcoming Communist meeting in Prague.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_63.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
:
Auscroll
v
r
****
*
FRONT PAGE:
PAGE TWO:
1
"UNIDAD" MONTHLY, ISSUE No. 36, APRIL, 187.-
(1) ANOTHER REGIME OFFICIAL DEFECTS IN GREAT BRITADI: A brief story on the Colla-
zo defection, followed by excerpts from his original statement. Excerpts include:
reasons why free-world sea trade with Cuba is declining (U.S. Black List, Latin
workers' boycott, etc.); Cuba-trading shipowners take advantage of Castro and over-
charge him for charters; the personnel problem in "Mambisas"; the planned deception
for Expo 67 (exhibiting console record players made up of foreign components and
wood as Cuban-made); general conclusion: régine officials don't know where they are
headed for.
(2) EDITORIAL: HATED BY FRIEND AND FOE: The Russians hate Castro because he has
two-timed them in the Sino-Sovict rift; the Chinese loathe him because they regard
him as a mercenary who has sold out to the Soviets. Latin American Reds hate him
as well, because, as they say, he has promoted fractionalism in their ranks. Anti-
Communists throughout the Americas hate him too, as there is not a country in the
hemisphere where mothers and wives are not mourning the loss of a dear one to Cas-
troite terrorists. And anti-Red Cubans would not touch Castro with a ten-foot pole,
Hated by friend and foe alike, how could anyone think that Castro may eventually
survive a chronic economic crisis that his own ineptitutde has wrought on the nation?
:
(1) MOROCCO BREAK'S DEPENDENCE ON CUBAN SUGAR: From the EIR we take the story on the
Moroccan plan to develop their own sugar industry at the expense of purchases from
Cuba. This plan, we stress, is receiving Polish financial and technical aid, which
shows to what extent Castro's Red comrades are concerned with his sugar interests.
(2) DO THE SOVIETS SEND 'REJECT' PARTS TO CUBA?: Also from the EIR, this is the
story on the "coincidence" that poor-quality or defective parts began to arrive in
Cuba, under Soviet-Cuban barter agreements, right after the price of sugar dropped.
(3) WHERE IS RAUL?: A humorous poem by Luis R. Cáceres, Jr. It goes like this
1 ***
"
13 *** ****
QANG

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
732514
."
IA-SA
AMERICAN MARINA ENGINEER March, 1967 p.- 19
•
who have been employed 25
Yeats or poo be established
· at $100.
"Escalator Clause"
The AFL-CIO has pro-
posed that an "escalator"
clause be incorporated into
Social Security so that a re-
I believe that the United
States, now surpassed by 13
Western European nations
in the field of social welfare,
can and should provide its
citizens with a realistic and
sound Social Security sys-
tern consistent with our re-
sources."
Grecks Discipline Illness At Sea
Cuba Trators
Fourteen ship owners and
merchant marine Captains
were recently indicted by Greek
authorities for sailing trans-
ports to Cuba in violation of
existing regulations.
The Minister of the Mer-
chant Marine has reportedly
sent to the proper prosecution
authorities the files against the
@py owners and captains of S.S.
Irene, &.S. Barbarino, S.S. Alles
and S.S. Pantanasca. All the
vessels are registered in Pira-
eus.
Charges for similar violations
are to be brought zoon against
the owners and Captains of
the 8.S. Tina, S.S. Eftychia,
S.S. Andromachi, S.S. Kyra Ita-
rikleia. 8.S. Nikolas F., S.6. NIK.
clas M., S.S. Roulamaria and
6.S. Sofia
The courts and the Merchant
Marine Disciplinary Board are
reportedly investigating charg
es against other owners and
captains.
The steamer LOUISE LAKES
(Lykes Bros.) and the Yama-
shiro Maru recently collded
during heavy weather at Kee-
bung.
Rate Declines
Reported illnesses and in-
juries among seagoing per-
sonnel in 1966 in relation to
the average number of sca
faring jobs dipped to a new
low for the last decade.
Recently announced figures
stated that the combined per-
contage of illness and injuries,
based on an average of $4,000
jobs last year, declined to 73.7
per cent from the 85.5 per cent
reported on 60,000 jobs in 10:3.
The respective percentages of
Injuries and nesses also de
elined. The ratio of injuries
last year dropped to 42.4 per
cent from 45.5 per cent in 1525,
and that of illness was down
to 37.3 per cent from the fist
40 percent registered the pre-
vious year.
The percentage of injuries is
the lowest recorded since 1901,
and that of illness is the lowest
since 1957.
All told, in 1988 licensed and
unlicensed U. S. merchant ma-
rine personnel were reported as
injured or ill 43,045 times. Re-
ported injuries totaled 22,523
and reported illnesses totaled
20,122.
SEP COU ATT 1447
11
11
•UTgA=
26 apr
6.7
wakiutu stuns lage II
icy which has led since
the end of World War II
to neglect and abuse of
the American merchant
marine by government
agencies.
"President Johnson an-
nounced more than two
years ago that he would
offer a new maritime pol-
icy but this still has not
been put forward. In the
meantime, pressures have
been increasing within
government to abandon
entirely the idea that our
country needs a strong
American merchant mar-
ine.
"It is against this back-
? ground that we have ex-
amined the proposals ad-
vanced by Secretary of
Transportation Alan Boyd.
IN 1727
"We find many short-
comings in this program.
Most of its goals are far
from adequate to meet the
nation's needs. It contains
provisions which would
damage rather than
strengthen the effective-
Less of our merchant
marine. It leaves many
questions unanswered.
"However, in view of
the present desperate con-
dition of the U. S. merch-
ant marine, we must re-
gard the fact that a pro-
gram is being proposed
and that it is positive even
to the degree that this one
lê, Ra – hư
"The F
stands is a
It should
wards and
make ever
1 that the:
guards are
"We be
labor and
the mari
must abar
·
manger ar
feating at
ite behind
is practic
obtainable
"We be
ernment
abandon w
gerous sc
the FDL
are advar
tutes for
range m
policy. It v
to weaken
tea-power.
FDL pro
lined appe.
separate
from co:
need. This
unrealistic
all lessons
end result
imical to
terest, un
defense an
abilities.
"For th
devices su
· ed "effecti
ory which
1
SERRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_66.jpeg ---
14-00000
-
1
CLASSIFICATION
DATCH SYMBOL AND KUNDER
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET
-
UFGA 27416
+
with or are interested in following the Cuban economic piture.
We would particularly like to bring this presentation to the
attention of European firms and organizations with which ANSCROLL
is in contact and which are a factor in Cuban trade, We believe
that this will also give a basis for attribution to Santiago
should the Station desire it; if not, the facts and figures could
be used by Station Santiago without attribution and without
sourcing, for that matter, as we believe that the figures will
stand.
4.
JMWAVE will appreciate comments on the value of this
paper from Headquarters and Santiago. We also request a cabled
response from Santiago to the suggestion in paragraph 3 that
AMSCHOLL reproduce this study.
• Comments
Cabled 23 May 67.
Pro
Mark F. EFFIELD
:
1.
19-120-26
:
:
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_67.jpeg ---
=
:
14-00000
14 -
4
ECONOMIC RELATIONS BETWEEN
CUBA AND THE SOVIET UNION: HOW MUCH DEPENDENCY?
Cuba's dependency on the Soviet Union is known. The question is: how much de-
pendency? In order to arrive at some conclusion we have chosen Cuba's foreign trade
statistics for the 1959-1966 period.
We will work under the following economic assumption: Economic dependency of one
country on the other can be indicated to a considerable extent by their trade as
this
and as
:
indicates the need one country has of the other as a market for its exports
a supplier for its imports.
:
What we will do is to analyze the Cuban Trade Balance for the 1959-1966 period.
1) According to the assumption we established regarding trade dependency, we can
.
say that during 1959 Cuba was dependent upon the Free World for its markets as total
trade value for that year amounted to $ 1,305,700,000 and trade value with the Free
World represented $ 1,289,000,000 (or 98.8% of the total trade).
Broken down into exports and imports we see that in 1959 Cuban exports totaled
$ 637,700,000 while total imports were $ 688,000,000. Thus, the trade balance showed
a $ 26,500,000 deficit, which was a reflection of the trend started in 1958 due
* Every figure in this paper will be given in U.S. dollars unless otherwise
indicated. The sources for the figures used throughout the analysis, the
table, and charts were: "The Economist", "The New York Times", UN's Econo-
mic Reports on Latin America, "Cuba Comercio Exterior" magazine, "Visión"
magazine, "US News & World Report", and The Economist Intelligence Unit's
"Quarterly Economic Review".
te
It should be remembered that the figures refer only to the Cuban Trade Ba
lance; 1.e., imports and exports, and not to the Cuban Balance of Payments
which would reflect loans and financial arrangements, plus the Soviet mili-
tary and techical assistance; figures which do not appear in the balance of
trade and which are not available to us with sufficient authenticity to war-
Prived from omul file
rant their use.
CS Classifing/219-120-26
JOD #68-644/93
:
20 April 1967
Att. #1 to UFGA - 27416
Box: 19"
14:3
19-120-26
4.
4.2V
A

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_65.jpeg ---
14-00000
tr
10
RIFO
FROM
DISPATCH
SUBJECT
0
CLASSIFICATION
PROCESSING
SECRET
$10
ACCOM
ACTION
POSED
PLISHIT!
MARKED FOR INDEXIS
-
XXXX
NO INDERAS PEQUIRED
CKLY GOURED
1:49S DESK
CAN JUICE 10045
Chief of Station, Santiago
Chief, Western Hemisphere
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
TYPIC/MI/SPAWN/AMSCROLL
Study of Cuban/USSR Trade Relations
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
ACTION: See paragraphs 3 and 4.
ABSTRACT
RIPOLLE
☐
+40
REFERENCES:
A.
SANTIAGO-3885
B.
DIRECTOR-86882
C.
JMWAVE-6430
f
1. JAWAVE forwards herewith a study entitled Economic
Relations Between Cuba and the Soviet Union: How Much Depen-
dency? Both Santiago and Headquarters are being provided with
an original and one copy of the study in English and an original
and one copy in Spanish, Two sets of the one table and the six
charts that support the study are also being forwarded each
addressee, This is an AMSCROLL prepared study; the author is
AMERAME--1 in collaboration with AMSNAKE-1. It was prepared in
response to references A and B.
2. We have limited this study to an attempt to prove
statistically the very rapid rise of Cuban economic dependency
upon the Soviet Union. We have intentionally avoided editorial-
izing as the facts speak for themselves; thus we have drawn no
political conclusions, nor have we attempted to establish that
this economic dependency carries with it an implicit policy
control on the part of the Soviets (partly because policy control
does not necessarily follow and, in any event, the reader is free
to draw his own conclusions).
3. If it does not run counter to Station Santiago's plans,
we suggest that AMSCROLL - a JAWAVE asset that studies and
comments upon the Cuban economic scene-reproduce this study
under its name for private distribution to its list of sugar bro-
kers, trading firms, and international organizations that deal
1AπT
Attachments:
As stated, h/w
Distribution
2
CS COPY
COS, Santiago, w/atts., h/w
C/WH, W/atts.;- h/W-744 to WH/4/EH
CROSS
WH/COG w/o att REFERENCE TO
Removed from Project
Sit: file
JOB #68-644/93.
CS Classification: 19-120-26
Box:19: Folds 3
-
DATE TYPED
19-120-26
19 126 26/3
20 APR 67
DATE DISPATCHED
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
GROUP 1
El automatic
UFGA
3
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
27416
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/3
T
3

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_68.jpeg ---
14-00000
14745-5
:
"i
-
2 -
1
7
the unstable political situation under the Batista regime and the economic insecurity
of the new Castro regime.
Of the above mentioned exports, 97.8% were to Free World countries and only 2.2%
of the impoch
to Communist countries. Import-wise, 99.9% were made from Free World countries, while
0.1% were made from Communist countries.
as
A
Thus, we can conclude that Cuba was still very much dependent upon the Free World
but
ading partner
a
- trade wise - during 1959, Further, at least $ 623,800,000 (97.8% of total exports)
was collected in hard currency.
2) In 1960, Anastas Mikoyan visited Cuba and the Cuban-Soviet trade agreement was
signed. The effect of this agreement is immediately apparent when viewed through Cu-
ba's foreign trade figures.
4+
daward
Total trade value decreased in 1960 to $ 1,168,000,000 from $ 1,305,700,000. Free
World participation decreased more than proportionately, #6 the value of Cuban trade
with the Free World was $ 897,000,000, while trade with Communist countries increased
to $ 271,000,000 (or 23.3% of total trade) versus $ 1,289,900,000 and $ 15,800,000
(on 2.2% of to the tracke
respectively in 1959.
The trade balance was in favor of Cuba in the amount of $ 68,000,000 as
control
of imports, especially from the Free World, established in 1959 was having its effect.
3) In 1961 the whole foreign trade picture was transformed. It was almost the
reverse of 1960. Total trade amounted to $ 1,253,600,000, of which Free World parti-
cipation represented $ 348,600,000 (or 27.8%) and Communist trade $ 905,000,000 (or
72.2%).
J
We can look at this another way. In 1960, Cuban exports earned $ 467,000,000 in
hard currency. In 1961, the hard currency earnings amounted to $ 166,800,000 since the
$ 458,100,000 value of Cuban exports to the Communist countries represented "agreement
value" or "nominal hard currency value" as the trade was conducted under barter agree-
ments, with the Soviet Union providing about 10% to 20% of the total Cuban export value
in convertible currency.
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_71.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
"
=
}
- 5-
had less. Total trade amounted to $ 1,551,000,000 (compared to $ 1,410,200,000 in
1963), but trade with Communist countries reached $ 1,195,000,000 (compared to
$ 1,054,900,000 in 1963). Trade with the Free World remained at the
-
same level
-
the Cu-
$ 354,300,000 in 1963 and $ 356,000,000 in 1965, but with a difference
ban deficit in its trade balance with the Free World rose from $ 300,000 in 1963 to
$ 60,000,000 in 1965.
The sugar
So, the Soviets continued in control as trade with the Communist countries re-
presented more than three quarters of Cuba's total trade for that year.
production had already been mortgaged, the sugar market was depressed, and Cuba was
more and more dependent upon the Soviet Union.
7
8) Then came 1966. Sugar prices decreased to an average of 1.86 cts. per pound❤
Total trade decreased to $ 1,465,000,000 as compared with $ 1,551,000,000 in 1965.
Trade with Communist countries also decreased (from $ 1,195,000,000 in 1965 to
$ 1,160,000,000 in 1966) and the Soviets were able to push a little further and in
creased Cuba's deficit in the trade balance from $ 119,000,000 in 1965 to $ 200,000,000
in 1966.
-
Free World countries also gained. Total Free World trade decreased to $ 305,000,000
(from $ 356,000,000 in 1965), but the Cuban deficit increased from $ 60,000,000 in
1965 to $ 65,000,000 in 1966.
Our conclusions follow:
FIRST: Cuba is economically dependent upon the Soviet Union.
SECOND: This dependency is increasing. It has risen from 1.2% in 1959 to 79.2%
by 1966.
To buttress this conclusion we point out that:
A) Cuba has mortgaged its sugar production to the Soviet Union.
B) Cuba has exhausted its hard currency reserves. While an exact figure is
not available we estimated it to be about $ 20,000,000, in December 1964.
C) Cuba does not receive hard currency from its trade with the Communist
countries under the present barter agreements.
-

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
the
;
3
·
•
1.
f. Cofon
"
12211
'
3
C
to to
are sollevey t
to cile brown to Ow
. A
101.ve the corruidh cut a the
+
4
-
}
that the stage will
Qualisation of
sjón pabuuity comodaning v
_po con plataty d
'
21
neon
Ay byenne Lisle Up Kobatospied an a
And the story is no longer thy.
A
3. Contification of creport to Ally- but torzitt
of a part to her foundation. The following quote discou
wed follow-up action:
1
1.
"order to p
AND
51
00
propose the filth In
arrant to
on prior to
31 Der 1000 she f
Leparation Loisirent of
to
3
1
0
-
-
"
thin t
Nation and that the
g, and other c
7. We
us
mit the 2 oun
. From
__
L
that are
th
with those on th
☐
J
T'point, the aura
1 cation will calle A
11 activities in the refe
do in a productive way--ti
ana
-
to conti
'
tacly
vasted alk
nity and thereby hoop Lov
portant factors in view of nee
_chanted with ner entis tutur.
„poca most rey Dupronat
>
Do the intention to tagida do WOTNOT's relational with
to
. c.
H
13 to wait a
- due to in
her activities i
moto
sect.
and to the noblito
e of
'
to de directly but perfuted to
1.
This payment is ex
"
let up now as pooh
3
1
:
ļ
}
1
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_69.jpeg ---
**
:
14-00000
J
7
:
->>
3.
Cuba was now dependent, economically, upon the Communist World, especially the
The
Soviet Union. The fact that little hard currency was obtained from its new trade part-
t
ners further commited Cuba's economy to the Communist Bloc.)
4) In 1962, the trend continued. Total trade was $ 1,257,000,000, of which
$ 1,031,000,000 (82.1%) was with the Communist Bloc and only $ 226,000,000 (17.9%)
with Free World countries.
;
Another phenomenon appeared during 1962. The Soviets, who had been careful not
to press Cuba during 1960 with regards to their trade balance (which was favorable to
Cuba by $ 31,000,000), were shrewd enough to close the gap during 1961. The balance
was favorable to Cuba by $ 11,200,000.3
Clearly, the Soviet pressure was on. In 1962, Cuba faced a $ 227,000,000 deficit
with the Communist countries. Compounding this is the fact that by 1962 Cuba had spent
30.6% of its hard currency reserves in Free World markets.
Dependency upon the Soviet Union arrived to stay as trade with the Communist World
represented 82.1% of total trade and imports from the Communist area had, for the first
time, surp as sed Cuban exports to the Bloc.
5) Two interesting developments occured in 1963. First of all, total trade with
the Communist countries maintained the 1962 level ($ 1,031,000,000 in 1962 and
$ 1,054,900,000 in 1963). But, the Soviet Union tightened the grip by increasing its
exports to Cuba to $ 688,900,000 (in 1962 they represented $ 629,000,000), while Cuban
exports to the Communist Bloc decreased to $ 366,000,000 (in 1962 they represented
$ 402,000,000). Thus, the imbalance for Cuba increased to $ 322,900,000 (in 1962 it
was $ 227,000,000).
To recoup in
At the same time, Cuba attempted an approach to the Free World markets by taking
advantage of an increase in the price of sugar in the world market (sugar averaged
8.48 cts: per pound during this period). Cuba's total trade with the Free World in
creased to $ 354,300,000 (in 1962 it had been $ 226,000,000).
Cuban
Nevertheless, the 1963 trade balance worsened for Cuba as it showed a $ 323,200,000
deficit. The Free World countries were able to turn the tables on Cuba (as in 1962
1
*******
F

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_73.jpeg ---
14-00000
**
1300
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
CHART NO.1
CUBAN FOREIGN TRADE
1959-1966
Expressed in Mi liirn US Vollars
C
800
2
700
too
5cc
400
300
P
200
100
:
}
1
☑
1966
1959
EXPORTS TO
COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
1960
1961
1962
INPORTS FRON
1963
EXPORTS TO
COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
FREE WORLD
☐
1364
1965
IMPORTS FROM
FREE WORLD
SOURCE: TABLE NOTI

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_72.jpeg ---
14-00000
M-
1 M
T
T
•
**
-
6
:
-
D) Cuba has a $ 1,132,000,000 trade deficit with the Communist countries
for the 1963
->
1966 period.
Nor does this figure include Communist technical assis-
1
tance, military equipment, scholarships, and the like.
THIRD: Cuba has lost its position as a meaningful trader in the Free World, which
in turn has increased its dependency upon the Soviet Union.
Note.- For a statistical summary on Cuban Foreign Trade for the 1959
->>
1966 period
and for a graphic presentation of the above analysis see attached Table No. 1
and Charts Nos. 1 to 6.-
:
7
.
***

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_74.jpeg ---
14-00000
.
$:
7
6
50
*
30
EPORTS
IMPORTS
+3
>
CHART NO.6
CUBAN TRADE WITH
COMMUNIST COUNTRIES AS
Au
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL TRADE 1959-1966
TOTAL TRAXT100%
4434
*
L
-
WORLD SUGAR MARKET. AVERAGE PRICES
20
282
290
TL-
8.48...
586
212
486
CTS PER POUND
1961
1960'
+1961
1962.
1963
1964
1965
1966
SOURCE TABLE NO.
E
1
den a

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_70.jpeg ---
14-00000
322
:
"
-
the Free worldh
had
they had a $ 12,000,000 deficit on the trade balance with Cuba and now Cuba was
defect with the Free World,
$ 300,000 short).
a
6) For 1964, a favorable world sugar market (average price of 5.86 cts. per pound)
encouraged Cuba to continue its flirtation with the Free World. The Cuban treasury
was able to handle some hard currency for the first time in the Castro era and Cuban
commercial missions were sent to Europe and Japan to purchase items no longer available
in Cuba.
Total trade increased to $ 1,722,000,000 and the Free World participation increased
from $ 354,300,000 (25.28) in 1963 to $ 612,000,000 (35.6%). The Free World spending
spree took its toll as the trade balance with the Free World showed a $ 30,000,000 de-
ficit for Cuba. And here, we are speaking of a hard currency loss.
J
Not even in the midst of Cuba's affair with the Free World did the Soviet Union
Lose
Hoose control of the situation. On January 20, 1964, Cuba was signing a trade agree-
ment with the Soviet Union by which it was commiting about half of its planned future
sugar production to the Soviet Union for the next six years. The amounts Cuba agreed
to deliver to the Soviet Union were: 2,100,000 metric tons in 1965; 3,000,000 in 1966;
4,000,000 in 1967; 4,000,000 in 1968; 5,000,000 in 1969; and 5,000,000 in 1970. The
Soviet Union did agree to fix the price of Cuba's sugar at 6 cts. per pound, which
perhaps seems generous in 1967, but hardly a good offer on January 20, 1964, as the
price of sugar on January 19, 1964 was 9.50 cts. per pound. Adding insult to injury
the Soviet Union did not include in the 1964 trade agreement its previous commitment
to provide Cuba with 10% or 20% of the payments in hard currency as it had done in the
1960 agreement.
because it had
:
3
7) By 1965 Cuba was sending few trade missions abroad, virtually ceased its hard
-currency purchases, and found itself with almost no hard currency (the average price
and
of sugar had dropped to 2.12 cts. per pound). During 1965 Cuba faced the Soviet Union
more empty handed than before and the general trade situation returned to 1963 levels,
except that by now the Communist countries had more participation and the Free World
9.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_77.jpeg ---
14-00000
5
100
90
30
4C
32
5c
40
:
:
CHART NO.4
CUBAN IMPORTS
1959-1966
14
IMPORTS FROM SELECTED AREAS EXPRESSED IN PERCENTAGES. TOTAL IMPORTS = 100.0 %
"
30
20
10
1959
1860
1961
+962
1963
1764
1965
1966
☐
COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
FREE WORLD
SOURCE: TABLE NO.
7
"
VA

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_75.jpeg ---
14-00000
TABLE NO. 1
CUBA: FOREIGN TRADE
1959-1966
(Expressed in million USS )
}
YEAR
EXPORTS
%
IMPORTS
$
TOTALS:
✗BALANCE
Communist
Countries
1959
13.9
2.2
1.9
0.1
Non-Communist
117
Countries
1959
623.8
97.8
666.1
99.9
15.8
Gay
1289.9
1.2
15.8
98.9
42.3
+
Total
1959
637.7
100.0
668.0
100.0
1305.7
100,0 - 265
Communist
countries
1960
151,0
24,4
120.0
21.8
271.0
23.3
31.0
Non-Communist
F. '
countries
1960
467.0
75.6
430.0'
78,2
897.0
76.7
37.0
Total
1960
618.0
100.0
550.0
100.0
1168.0
100.0
68.0
Communist
countries
1961
458.1
73.4
446.9
70.0
905.0
72.2
11,2
Non-Communist
T
countries
1961
166.8
26.6
181.8
30.0
348.6
27.9
- 15,2
Total
1961
624.9
100.0
628.7
100.0
1253.6
100.2
- 39
Communist
countries
1962
402.0
_ 77,1
629.0
85.5
1031.0
82.1
-227.0
•Non-Communist
countries
1962
119,0
22.9
107.0
14.5
226.0
17.9
12.0
Total
1962
521.0
100.0 736.0
100.0
1257,0
102.0
-215.0
Communist
3:5
countries
1963
36F.0
67,4¯¯¯¯ 688.9
79.5
1054,9
74.9
-322.9
Non-Communist
210
countries
1963
177.0
32.6
177.3
22.5
354.3
25.2
0.3
Total
1963
543.0
13.2 866.2
100.0
1410.2
100.0
-323,2
Communist
countries
1964
423.2
59.2
687.0
68.6
1110,0
64.5
-264,0
Non-Communist
countries
1964
291.0
40.9
321,0
31.4
612.0
35.5
- 30,1
Total
1964
714.9
10.2
1008.0
100.0
1722.0
100.0
-294.3
Communist
countries
1965
538.2
78.4
657.0
75.3
1195.0
77.1
-119.2
Non-Communist
countries
1965
148.0
21.6
208.0
24.1
356.0
22.9
60.0
Total
1065
686.7
120.2
F65.0
13.0
15540
100.0
-179.9
Communist
countries
1966
480.0
80.0
fånga 79.6
1160.0
79.2
-270.0
Non-Communist
countries
1046
120.2
27.
105.0
21.4
305.0
20.8
-
- 65,2.
• 1 1
1066
100.2
565.0
107.2
:46.5,"
100.0
• als
4,324.5
6.186.9
-
11,132.5
-1,2345
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_76.jpeg ---
14-00000
147
700-
600
:
7
***
CHART NO.5
CUBAN TRADE WITH COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
EXPRESSED IN MILLION AGREEMENT US DOLLARS
1959-1966
100
8
EXPRESSED IN PERCENTAGES. TRADE VALUE -10-6%0
500-
400
200-
#100-
:
i
1
7
1969 1968
1965 1965 1966
1959 1960 1968 1968 1969
SOURCE: TABLE NO.1
90
+44
80
70
60
50
43
4
---
30
20
10
EXPORTS
IMPORTS
1959 1960 1961 1982 1963 1964 1965 1966
}
ļ

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_79.jpeg ---
14-00000
+
19-120-26
141
100
CHART NO.2
CUBAN FOREIGN TRADE
1959-1966
TRADE WITH SELECTED AREAS EXFRESSED IN PERCENTAGES, TOTAL TRADE = 100.0%
48
10
60
50
40
30
20
IC
+47
⭑14
ta
1.4
c
1359
1960
1961
1762
1965
1964
1965
1966
FREE WORLD
SCURCE: TABLE NO. 1
COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_78.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
$
177
:
:
!
100
CHART NO.3
CUBAN EXPORTS
1959-1966
EXPORTS TO SELECTED AREAS EXPRESSED IN PERCENTAGES, TOTAL EXPORTS= 100.0%
9c
20
60
14
50
40
30
ic
10
1.
I
C
1959
1960
1961
1962
1965
1964
1465
1966
☐ COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
FREE WORLD
SCURCE: TABLE NO.
*
6 a

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_82.jpeg ---
14-00000
1385
SECRET
-3-
.....
B.
ADMINISTRATION
6.
The amount budgeted for the quarter under review was
$36,750 of which $33,700.72 was spent. Of this amount, $9,728
was for salaries and $23,972.72 for operations and office.
expenses.
.7. Funding is handled as follows: AMSCROLL operational and
administrative expenses are reimbursed monthly by the case
officer to the treasurer after submission of an accounting of
funds spent. Funds for salaries are also given the treasurer by
the case officer which for tax purposes are paid by a local
cover company.
C.
PROBLEMS
8. The Station is not aware of any problems during this
quarter worthy of comment.
D. PLANS FOR NEXT QUARTER
* we now some
The
The
9. AMSCROLL broadcasting via AMTHIGH will cease 20 April
and AMTHIGH has been so informed by letter dated 13 March.
: AMSCROLL programs will thereafter be carried by JMHOPE.
Station expects that this move will result in a substantial
saving.
the
SECRET
:
2441
g

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
DISPATCH
25 C FNT
SC
Chief of Station, JM-AVS
-
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division
Operational/Proposed AMFRAME Operation
-
REFERENCES
XX
Ansabee
NG REQUATO
QAND
10483
CLOSE DEUING
REFERENCES: A.
B.
AMSCROLL Quarterly Progress Report
for period 1 July
UFGW-6699
-
30 September 1967
1.
Please pouch additional information about the
proposed development of "the new AMFRAME organization" in
order to enable Headquarters to determine if there is any
conflict with the intent of the LNLOFT action approving
the termination of AMSCROLL.
2.
As you may recall, it was originally thought that
distribution of economic data might be handled by AMHIN,
after termination of ANSCROLL, possibly by creation of an
AMHIM économic desk staffed by former AMSCROLL employees.
In any event, neither Headquarters nor LNLOFT anticipated
that the termination of one organization would be followod
by development of another conducting the same operational
activities. On the contrary, our presentation to LNLOFT
emphasized further reductions of organizational support.
3. In addition to a detailed description of the
proposed organization and related administrative and operational
cost estimates, please forward more information about plans
for distribution of the new series.
Distribution:
3 - COS, JMWAVE
CROSS REFERENCE TO
201-278758
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
30 October 1967
Distribution:
WH/Reg/C
WH/COG/CA
1
-
1
->>
l
-
WH/COG
-
201-278758
STRACT
RACT &
FORM 53 USE PREVIOUS EDITION
10
Michael C. CHOADEN
MICROFILMED
NOV 18 1967
DOC. MICÃO. SER.
19-120-26
DATE
2 NOV 1967
UFGH-6778
CLASSIFICATION G339:
Excluded from satima
SECRET
OFFICE
WH/COG/CA
OFFICER
19
HOS FILE NUMBER
ORIGINATING
P. Oberst 1%
19-120-26
TYPIST
jmg
COORDINATING
OFFICE SYMBOL
DATE
RELEASING
OFFICE SYMBOL
DATE
OFS SIGNATURE
[C/WH/COG
OFFICER'S NAME
Ext
5003
David A. Phillips
DISPATCH

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_84.jpeg ---
14-00000
-73.
?
147
m
..
The M 'ni Herald
22-A Sunday, April 23, 1967
First Work
Scheduled
On Capital
British Honduras
Plans Inland City
Compiled by Our Latin America Staff
BELIZE, British Honduras
Construction on a long
awaited new capital in the
interior for this British Cen-
tral American possession is
expected to begin within six
weeks.
Total cost is estimated at
$14 million. It will include
roads, drainage, water sup-
ply, electricity, sewage dis-
posal, public buildings and
740 houses of various types.
The public buildings will
Include a legislative assem-
bly building, two multistory
government office buildings,
Focus On
LATIN ·
AMERICA
a post office, magistrate's
court, 42-bed hospital, two
primary schools and one com-
prehensive secondary school
The new capital site is
about 30 miles inland from
the hurrić a n e-susceptible
coastal city of Belize where
about one third of the territo-
ry's 110.000 population lives.
+
Grenade Injures 12
In Costa Rica Crowd
-
SAN JOSE, Costa Rica
A fragmentation grenade
thrown into a crowd paying
tribute to defeated presiden-
tial candidate Daniel Oduber
injured 12 persons, including
a six-year-old child, police
reported Saturday.
Police said three people
had been arrested in connec
tion with the grenade blast.
*
Argentina Students
Lose School Role
-
BUENOS AIRES The
Argentine military govern-
ment of Lt. Gen. Juan Carlos
Ongania has banned stu-
dents from ruling bodies of
the nine state universities
and warned students and
professors to stay out of poli-
tics.
One-Day Halt OKd
In Refugee Flights
"
*
*
i
i

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_80.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
☐
I
:
MEMORANDUM
TO
1
FROM
:
SUBJECT:
SECRET
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
PW/MARCHIBANK
TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
Amcroll D&P
mssall
4 April 1967
WPF 1333
Distribution
-
3
-
1
1
-
31 March 1967
AMSCROLL Progress Report
1 January
-
- COS
PW/MARCHBANK
PW/Chrono
- REG
+
A.
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
1. During the quarter under review AMSCROLL continued its
campaign to discredit the Cuban regime's economic management.
As before, the campaign was conducted by the AMSCROLL radio
program and by serious economic studies and comment that were
provided its mailing list of sugar brokers, selected firms
engaged in international trade and shipping, and commercial and
technical journals. The Station continues to be encouraged by
evidence of increased acceptance of the AMSCROLL efforts. For
example, AMSCROLL received eighteen letters from Cuba during this
quarter, all of which were in direct response to the radio program.
Of these, twelve were received in March which represents the
highest monthly total since initiating the program. This compa res
with eleven the previous quarter and only three in the corresponding
quarter of 1965. In January, the Vice President of the Association
of Sugar Producers of Puerto Rico called upon the AMSCROLL
offices to request AMSCROLL's assistance in preparing a chapter
on Cuban sugar production problems to be included in a book this
person is writing. AMSCROLL received requests from four universi-
ties or colleges requesting written material, from a graduate
student preparing a thesis on the lot of the Cuban peasant, from
the U.S. Army Special Warfare School Library, and others.
The
wire services, particularly Associated Press and Agence France
Presse, continued to file stories based upon AMSCROLL releases.
2. The AMSCROLL radio program continued as reported for the
last quarter--daily except Sunday for ten minutes over ANTHIGH..
In addition, on 1 January AMSCROLL began a thirteen minute
program each Sunday on AMTHIGH. These programs are in large part
confined to subjects of an economic nature with the time on
Sunday devoted to an in-depth analysis of what has occurred in
this area since the previous Sunday. Typical themes hit through-
out this quarter were: Economic and sociological aspects of
Castro's "San Andres" speech of 28 January, an unfavorable
balance of trade with Spain of $30,000,000, significance of Soviet
trade with Chile as compared with Cuba, an analysis of a UN
economic study of Cuba which shows that rice production in Cuba
has declined 50% since 1960, the Royal British Institute's
finding that Cuba's economy makes her a poor trading risk, and
a report that Greek ship owners that persist in trading with
SECRET
- -

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_83.jpeg ---
14-00000
J
SECRET
DTP
IV QUARTER
ACTIVITY
PROGRAM
AMSCROLL
:
PART 3
!
Press & Publications
1. What contribution or progress did activity make during
quarter toward established objectives?
The AMSCROLL organization continued to make progress to
establish itself as a reputable analyst of Cuban economic
developments. Once again it has accurately forecast the
final sugar harvest weeks in advance of other authorities
of which AMSCROLL is aware.
2. What progress is the activity expected to make during
the forthcoming quarter toward its objectives?
A revamping of the AMSCROLL radio program to make it more
objective will be a major effort of the forthcoming quarter.
with
"3. Has the activity produced intelligence? Cite quantity
and quality.
No. This activity is not designed to produce intelligence.
4. Is continuation recommended?
YES
5. Funds budgeted for FY 67 $ 134,000
Expended (estimate) during IV Quarter $ 23,120
Total expenditures (estimate) for FY 67 $ 123,038.41
SECRET
.
"

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_81.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
->
- 2 -
Cuba are being brought to trial. Throughout this period and
whenever possible a particular effort was made to relate
developments in China to present or possible developments in
Cuba. The difficulties of the Chinese economy provided
examples to which a Cuban "twist" could be put; e.g., the
Chinese and Cuban economic failures demonstrate the failure of
applied communism in the economic area.
3. AMSCROLL is continuing its analysis of the current
sugar crop. Its releases on this subject continue to generate
interest and the Station has seen coverage in The Miami Herald,
El Universal (of Caracas), The Times of The Americas, and
Diario Las Americas. The AMSCROLL releases on Free World
shipping to Cuba were picked up by both AP and AFP and were
published in the newspapers listed in the previous sentence as
well as The Montreal Star. The AMHIM Bulletin also carries
the bulk of these releases and we can therefore presume coverage
of at least some of this information in Jatin America. An
interesting study was an analysis of British/Cuban trade which
demonstrates that Great Britain is now getting the better part
of the bargain; this story was filed by AFP as was a story of
the poor quality of molasses being sold by the Cubans to British
firms. Finally, AMSCROLL continued to get mileage from the
Damlier-Benz story by reporting that this German firm has finally
refused to sell spare parts to Cuba; the story was filed by AFP
and published at least by Diario las Americas.
4. AMSCROLL continued its mailing program to Cuba, but on a
further reduced scale. During the quarter about 5,000 were
mailed versus 5,600 during the previous quarter. We count a
distribution during this quarter of 7,127 press releases and
economic studies to places other than Cuba.
5. A recent development which may have an interesting
operational potential was a telephone call to AMSCROLL from
Czarnikow-Rionda, the New York sugar brokers, which was
triggered by an AMSCROLL "case study" of the problems being
faced by a Cuban sugar mill. The firm told AMSCROLL that it has
for some time suspected Cuban sugar production figures and
wondered if AMSCROLL had any such suspicions. AMSCROLL (through
AMFRAME-1) has written to say it would be most interested in
following any leads from Czarnikow-Rionda that could support a
conclusion that Cuban production figures are false, which is
where this matter now lies. The officials of Czarnikow-Rionda
are well known to AMSCROLL and we shall be interested in seeing
what the firm developes for AMSCROLL.
:
-
1. 1
}
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_85.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
:
7
'U.S. OFFICIALS Satur-
day announced that two Cu.
hân refugee flights for Mon.
day. May 1. will be suspend-
ed at the request of the Cu-
ban government. Communist
May Day activities are sched-
uled on the island that day.
The U.S. financed flights,
which have brought more
than 60,000 refugees to this
country since they were ini-
tiated 17 .month= saa vi!! W.
resumed May 2 on a twice-a-
day, five-day-a-week basis.
3
Venezuelan Reds
'Condemn Terrorism'
-
*CARACAS Venezuela's
outlawed Communist Party
made an about face at its
latest secret meeting, reject-
ing the thesis of armed insur-
rection and favoring partici-
pation in elections, a Commu-
nist informant said here.
The Eighth Plenum of the
Venezuelan Communist Par-
ty (PCV). "held somewhere
in Venezuela, agreed to do
without armed insurrection,
condemn terrorism and par-
ticipate in the next election,"
the Communist source report-
ed.
The PCV was outlawed by
former President Romulo
Betancourt in 1962 and if
the government does not per-
mit legalization now. the
party will negotiate its vot-
ing strength with leftist par-
ties that operate legally in
the country.
19 Western Ships
Call at Cuban Ports
NINETEEN vessels from
· Western countries, including
10 flying the British flag.
called at Cuban ports in
March. a Cuban exile group
In Miami reported Saturday.
⚫ The exile Revolutionary
Unity (UR) organization.
which keeps tabs on western
world shipping to Cuba, said
the 19 ships also included
two each from Lebanon, Cy-
prus and Italy; and one each
from Greece. Finland and
Panama. The Panamanian
vessel was the first flying
that country's flag to call on
a Cuban port since April
1963.
Colombia Denies
Using U.S. Troops
7. BOGOTA
Colhian
Army Commander Gen. Guil-
lermo Pinzon Saturday de-
nied charges from Havana
that U.S. troops are aiding
the Colombian Army in its į
anti-guerrilla campaign.
He said armed subversive
activities in the country are
"in a process of disintegra-
tion" due to action of Colomn-
bian Army units.
#
→
ADD
71->
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_88.jpeg ---
14-00000
pyt
1
7:
TO
DISPATCH
Chief, WH Division
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
PRO
POSED
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
INFO.
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
TYPIC/Operational
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
Quarterly Progress Reports Concerning Political Action Programs
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
Transmitted herewith are seven progress reports, listed
below, for the second quarter of FY 67 concerning the Political
Action programs of the Station.
AMKNOT
ANSCROLL
AMCROW
-filed 19-120-26
Attachments H/W
7 Progress Reports
Distribution:
2 – WH/C W/Atts.
-
AMBASAL
AMLIRA
AMSTRUT
ANHOP
CROSS REFERENCE TO
559UP 1
Excluded 23 antemato
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
Philip G. Elmard
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
6 Jan. 67
JAN - 9 1957
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-26713
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_87.jpeg ---
14-00000
514
-
se kring
514 4
:
:
;
UNITED LIBERAL PARTY
Founder & President:
REV. HENRY MUIR
SECRET
74 Spanish Town Road
Kingston 13 P.OBox9
Jamaica W.S.
Mario Seiglie
Secretary General
Unidad Revolucionaria (U.R)
10.S.E 9th Street
Miami Fla
Dear Sir
151 Jan
1967
I wish you a prosperious 1967.
my respect to all your men for me.
I have return to Jamaica on the 1614 Dec 196
You have promise to send me those leaflet
people can read how we iw ist.
me to give them out in Jamaica hear so that
is and you have not send them Why?
Please what ever you are sending for me don't
put your address on them only put the United
Liberal Party
My on to it. I dont want them to know
where they came from. Please let me have
othing ready for the election soon.
million different cappings. Weave now
V.I wish you all success in your.
aven
in your undertan
Her finy Huis President United Liberality.
CS COPY
s/caa
UFCA-20
26%40
SECRE
19_1626

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_89.jpeg ---
14-00000
*MM
i
J
:
MEMORANDUM
TO
FROM
SUBJECT:
A.
Chief of Station
PV/MONESTIER
TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
AMDOP - Progress Report
1 October – 31 December 1966
->
OFERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
29 December 1966
UP. · 1269
Distribution
T-COS
1 -
1
1
-
PW/HONESTIER
PW/Chrono
REG
1. AMMOF maintained contact with party leaders throughout
the hemisphere during the quarter. The majority of the corres-
pondence was handled by AHCRIB/1, the leader of the youth wing,
who was informed by the JUDCA secretary-general, both during his
October visit and in subsequent correspondence, that the AMMOP
youth wing was performing effective work and that a JUDCA study
_ on AMNOP activities would be forthcoming. The JUDCẢ secretary-
general favors the incorporation of the AMHOF youth sector into
his organization.
2. AMMOP youth published two bulletins on their activities
along with an interesting summary on the activities of their
counterparts in other countries, which was mailed to a list of
contacts and correspondents. Several party officials in other
countries have requested to be placed on the AMMOP mailing lists,
an indication that AMMOP is becoming more widely recognized as a
representative political movement.
3. The AMBOP youth group has also organized a series of
seminars which attracted from 30-35 participants during the quar-
ter. The purpose, in addition to offering discussions on such
subjects as politics, labor and agriculture, was to promote more
group unity and to draw new sources of talent.
B. ADMINISTRATIVE
This sum
4. During the quarter, expenses totaled $2,075.77.
included monthly support to AMMOP, and salary and operational
expenses of AMCRIS/1. This compares with a budget allocation of
$3,750 for the reporting period.
:
CROU 1
Exch MN TAT
.
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
TO
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
Chief of Station, Nexico City
INFO
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division
Cl to
ht
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
PLISHED
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN RIDGE INDOUNG
ABSTRACT
MICROFILM
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
SUBJECT 'TYPIC/ANSCROLL
0 Economic Intelligence Report Publication
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
Reference:
MEXICO CITY 2578
We forward under separate cover three copies of
the Spanish Edition of the current AMSCROLL Economic
Report and in the future will send one English and
three Spanish copies as requested in the reference.
1
Roger E. MARCHBANK
'
Attachment:
1
Spanish edition Economic Report, 3 copies, U/B/C
Distribution
-
222
-
COS, Mexico City, w/att, U/S/C
WII/COG, w/o att
-
C/WII, w/o att
210 to wrj|
Exclades
17-10-26
CS COPY
DATE TYPED
DATE DISPATCHED
25 Aug 1967
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 28357
QUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-26/4
.

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_86.jpeg ---
14-00000
*
-
3
10
INFO.
FROM
DISPATCH
SUBJECT
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
Chief of Station, Kingston
Chief, WH
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
TYPIC/AMSCROLL/Operational
Letter from Rev. Henry Muir
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES
Action Required: FYI
Reference:
KINGSTON-2818
C/WH/COG
PROCESSING
PRO
POSED
ACTION
ALCO....
PLISHED
:
MARKED FOR INDEXING
XX
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
AMUNITY MICROFILM
1
We forward for your information a copy of a letter dated
15 January from Rev. Henry Muir in which he requests "a million
different coppies" (sic) of AMSCROLL publications that he had
previously seen. In view of the reference JMWAVE will instruct
AMSCROLL to ignore this letter.
W
Philip G. ELMARD
Attachment:
copy of letter, USdated)
Distribution
3
-
2
COS, Kingston, w/att., USC.
- C/WH, w/att. USC 235 fork wily/dw/SCA
WH/COG, W/att., USC
CRO:
22.
CS. COPY
REFERENCE TO
CROUP 1
Excluded from
dongrading and
dations
DATE TYPED
19-120-26
24 JAN 67
DATE DISPATCHED
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA 26840
-
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
| 2.5 1967
127
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
♦ 19-120-26/3
. 3
4
"
bie

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_90.jpeg ---
14-00000
- '
A
"
SECRET
2
C.
PROBLEMB
5.
The difficulties in the operation of the AMMOP project
are due largely to the lack of effective leadership and initiative.
The AMHOP youth wing is operating with reasonable effectiveness
within its sphere but is hampered by the lack of active JUDCA
membership.
D. FUTURE PLANS
6. Additional seminars are projected for the next quarter.
Both AMMOP and its youth sector will maintain active correspondence
to gain recognition as knowledgeable and active groups. In addition,
future AMMOF activities will be aimed at creating a more cohesive
organizational structure, attracting responsible leadership talent
to the organization, and gaining greater recognition and possible
financial support and guidance from the Parent International Move-
mont.
.
SECRET

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_91.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
MEMORANDUK
Chief of Station
TO
FROM
: PW/MARCHBANK
SUBJECT: TYPIC, OPERATIONAL
1 October
Progress Report
ANKNOT
-
23 December 1966
WP = 1265
Distribution
4 - COS
1
1
-
-
31 December 1966
PW/MARCHBANK
PW/Chrono
1 - RI Chrono
"
;
A. OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
1. The AMKNOT organization continued during the quarter
under review with its program of assisting Cuban merchant
mariners who have defected from their service. Fifteen diff-
erent cases were handled during this period which included
five resettlement cases in areas other than JMWAVE. Billets
-
at sea were found for two more--one as a first mate and one as
a third mate. The remaining eight received assistance in obtain-
ing employment or what might be called administrative aid-assis-
tance in obtaining social security numbers, etc.
2.
Processing continued for those interested in employment
by the Military Sea Transport Service (MSTS). Progress in
obtaining the necessary U.8. Coast Guard certification is slow
and of the four that applied for this during the previous quarter
only two had received the certification by the end of the current
quarter. During this quarter two more former Cuban merchant
officers sought through AMKNOT this certification as they expressed
interest in MSTS employment. The current status is: In process--6;
Coast Guard certifications received--2; physical examinations given
(and passed)--4. In addition, applications for employment together
with the Coast Guard certifications and completed physical examin-
ation forms were forwarded 28 December to the cover company in
Baltimore for 2. The remainder will be forwarded as the Coast
Guard certifications are received.
3. The activities of the AMKNOT organization continue to
receive publicity. The Station has four clips from different
papers including one from El Universal of Caracas. AMKNOT issued
one press release during this quarter-which was an "eyewitness"
account of the attempt of four Cuban sailors to obtain political
asylum in the Canary Islands. In fact, this was a letter mailed
to AMKNOT by USPOT-2 and signed in pseudonym. The story was
picked up by Diario Las Americas in its 15 December issue.
SECRET
GECLP 1
Excluded from zatomatic
Cowngrating and
recipificatica
434445

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_94.jpeg ---
14-00000
ECRE
DE
MEMORANDUM
TO
FROM
:
}
SUBJECT
:
ather
A.
Chief of Station
PW/MARCHBANK
TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
AMCROW
-
Progress Report
1 October-31 December 1966
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
19 December 1966
WPN-1281
Distribution
T-COB.
1-PW/MARCHBANK
1-PW/Chrono
1-REG
1. As reported in the previous Progress Report the
ANCROW offices were closed and all personnel were terminated
except for AMCROW-14. Thus there were no operational
activities.
However, the Station requested AMCROW-14
to send President Leoni of Venezuela a cable congratulating
him upon the action the Venezuelan Government took against the
leftists operating from the Central University of Caracas.
The cable was sent 15 December and was signed by AMCROW-14
in his capacity as a former PBRUMEN cabinet officer. This
was in response to paragraph 2 of Caracas 5482.
B.
ADMINISTRATION
2.
AMCROW-14 continued to receive his termination pay
of $425 per month. The final payment will be made 31 December.
3.
A total of $1,349.25 was spent by AMCROW for the
quafter ending 31 December which represents salary for AMCROW,14
@ $425.00 per month plus a payment of $74.25 to the state
unemployment fund.
c. PROBLEMS
www
44245
4. There were no problems during this quarter. AMCROW-14 has
apparently accepted the fact that he will be terminated 31 December.
D. PLANS FOR THE NEXT QUARTER
5. There are no plans for the next quarter as this activity
will cease with the final payment to AMCROW-14 on 31 December 1966.
GRCCP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading 201
declamaitication
:
SECRET
:
;
7
1747
J
1
}
:
j
+

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_93.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
- 3 -
15
=
D. PLANS FOR THE NEXT QUARTER
7. The Station currently plans that AMPOLISH-1 will assume
his duties with AMKNOT on 2 January 1967 as this is the date
AMASK-1 will join the shoe company. AMKNOT will continue pro-
cessing applications of those interested in MSTS employment and
will encourage additional applications from those that appear
qualified and interested. Also, AMKNOT, of course, will receive
all defecting mariners that appear in the area and will continue
to encourage, where it can, additional defections.
jsz
i
37
31
SEGRET
1
☑
:
T

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_95.jpeg ---
14-00000
140
SECRET
MEMORANDUM
Chief of Station
TO
FRON
SUBJECT:
PW/FABSIE
TYFIC/OPERATIONAL
AMBASAL
-
Progress Report
1 October - 31 December 1966
A. OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
30 December 1968
WPF - 1273
Distribution
T-COS
1 -
FW/FABSIK
1 - PW/Chrono
1 - REG
1. Printed Propaganda During the period under review
this operation produced a total of 4,513 pieces of written
propaganda for distribution as follows:
Cuba
500 copies of the AMBASAL newsletter;
b. Latin America :
4,000 copies of the AMBASAL bulletin;
C.
--
Press Releases: 13 releases dealing with such subjects
as the treatment of political prisoners, executions, violations
of legal and human rights, etc. These releases wore the bases
for "reports that appeared in Diario Las Americas and in the
AMHIN bulletin.
-
-
Correspon
2. Correspondence with International Organizations
denco was maintaised and exchanged with the International Commission
of Jurists, the Americas Fund for Free Jurists, and the UN and OAS
International Commissions of Human Rights. The subject matter of
this correspondence was identical with the subjects mentioned in
paragraph ic above.
3. Impact In an effort to focus attention on the Cuban
political prisoners issue, AMBASAL/1 prepared a 15 page document on
this subject which he presented in person in October 1966 to the
Human Rights Commission of the OAS. The president of the commission
told ANBASAL/1 that this document was the best he had seen on the
subject and the commission, after discussion, agreed to continue
efforts to get permission to travel to Cuba to investigate the
charges contained in the document. AMBASAL/1 also visited the UN
Human Rights Commission, the Interamerican Federation of Lawyers,
the American Fund for Free Jurists, and the president of the Inter-
national Red Cross. All in all, the effort to focus attention on
the political prisoners issue was successful and resulted in wire
service, radio, and press coverage. A total of 23 clippings,
dealing with AMBASAL/1's activities in this regard, was sent to
Readquarters,
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from autematic
Crag an
8
1
}
:
:
F.
}

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_92.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
-
- 2
>
:
B.
ADMINISTRATION
4. The AMKNOT organization remains constituted as reported
in the previous Quarterly Report. However, in December AMASK-1
was offered a permanent position as personnel director of a local
shoe company that employs some four hundred people. His starting
salary will be $475.00 per month which will be increased after
the first three months and increased again after the second three
months. The Station concurred with AMASE-1 that he accept for
these reasons: (1) The AMKNOT position is not permanent, (2)
it appears that AMASK-1 will be terminated when AMKNOT is closed,
(3) this position should solve AMASK-l's personal financial prob-
lems, and (4) AMASK-1 has agreed to remain as chairman of AMKNOT
without salary and to continue to lend his name to the organization.
The Station expects to replace AMASK-1 with AMPOLISH-1 who appears
qualified to handle the hand-holding and housekeeping aspects of
AHKNOT. AMPOLISH-1 is presently employed by a local automobile
dealer and is able to take the necessary time off to handle the
AMKNOT matters. We see three advantages to this development:
(1) The Station will be spared a possible disposal situation when
AMKNOT is closed (it has been made clear to AMPOLISH-1 that this
is a temporary assignment that at the most will last for a few
months), (2) We have offered AMPOLISH-1 $200.00 per month versus
$390.00 for AMASK-1, and (3) AMASK-1 should be in an excellent
position to offer at least temporary employment in the shoe fac-
tory to mariners to come.
5.
An estimated total of $2,505.00 was spent during this
quarter. This amount represents AMASK-l's salary and allowances,
office expenses, and English instruction for those seeking MSTS
employment. Expenses by month were: October, $855.00; November,
$825.00; and December (estimated), $825.00. The allotment for
this activity for the quarter was $3,000.00.
.C. PROBLEMS
6. The chief problem of the period was caused by the antics
of Raul QUINTANA Ruiz who jumped ship in New Orleans after a run-
in with the ship's captain and after difficulties with the Immi-
gration and Naturalization Service over the lack of proper documen-
tation to re-enter the country. QUINTANA has been resettled in
California, though we may not have heard the last from him; AMASK-1
recently received a letter from QUINTANA which said that QUINTANA
was about to sue the shipping line that had employed him for back
salary and loss of personal effects that QUINTANA claims the captain
had locked up. AMASK-1 was advised to ignore the letter in view
of the difficulties already caused and in view of his potential for
further trouble (see paragraphs 2 and 3 of JMWAVE-3990).
SECRET
44
:
"
.
2th the

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_96.jpeg ---
14-00000
T
SECRET
2
-
1
$45
TH
.
-
4. Radio The weekly AMBASAL radio programs were carried
by JMHOPE and tapes of each program were sent to SWBULL/1 for
re-broadcast. The content of these programs was in line with
the juridical nature of the AMBASAL organization, although
editorial comment was frequently made on current themes not
specifically related to the legal field.
B.
ADMINISTRATION
5. The 1967 fiscal year budget for AMBASAL is $43,000.00.
On a quarterly basis the allotted figure is $10,750.00. During
I this quarter AMBASAL expenses amounted to $11,760.72, a total
of $1,010.72 in excess of the allotted figure. Of the overall
quarterly expenses of $11,760.72, agent salaries accounted for
$7,000.00, radio expenses amounted to $1,901.72 and $2,859.00
was spent on printed propaganda, operational travel, and miscel-
laneous office expenses. Total operational expenses for the
first six months of FY 1967 were $23,987.28, an excess of $2,487.28
over the $21,500.00 allocated for the first half of the fiscal
year.
c. PROBLEMS
6. Termination of the principal agent may be difficult.
Consideration is being given to the possible future use of
AMBASAL/1 as a singleton agent. The alternative is to assist him
in finding suitable employment; a difficult task given his age
(42), complete lack of English, and aspects of his personality
and character.
7. We do not anticipate any other problems relative to
the termination of this operation. The AMBASAL newsletters sent
to Cuba were stopped with the October issue and the monthly
bulletin with the November issue. Four of the AMBASAL personnel
were terminated 31 December and the radio programs were stopped
in December.
· D.
PLANS FOR THE NEXT QUARTER
8. Three AMBASAL employees will be terminated effective
31 January 1967 and the AMBASAL office will be closed during that
month. It is planned to permit AMBASAL/1 to retain some of the
equipment now in his office to encourage him in his plans to con-
tinue to operate on a scaled-down, independent basis. We will
continue to pay a monthly salary to AMBASAL/1 through March 1967
while attempting to solve his personal situation discussed in the
preceding section.
:
{
i
SECRET
}
44
1

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_97.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET
:
27 December 1968
UP..
1266
MEMORANDUM
TO
FROM
: Chief of Station
SUBJECT:
PW/RUBASH
TYPIC/OPERATIONAL
1
AMLIRA
Frogress Report
1
1 October
-
31 December 1966
-
Distribution
Dist
-
COS
PW/RUBASH
PW/Chrono
REG
:
* programas jau pra ven
A.
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
1. During the second quarter of FY 1967 the AHLIRA group
compiled a file of newspaper clippings concerning the political
occurrences involving the Cuban delegation during the tenth
Central American and Caribbean games held in Puerto Rico during
June 1966. This file was sent in October to Mr. Avery BRUNDAGER,
president of the International Olympic Committee, with the
request that the file be brought to the attention of the IOC at
the next meeting of that body for whatever action might be
deemed appropriate.
2. Significant AMLIRA correspondence included the following:
8.
A letter to each member of the Special Consultation
Committee on Security of the OAS pointing out the use sade
by Communist governments, specifically Cuba, of sports for
propaganda and political ends.
b. A letter from the Argentine representative on the
IOC in which he acknowledges receipt of a tape with recorded
inflammatory remarks by Jose LLANUSA, the head of the Cuban
delegation at the CA and Caribbean games in Puerto Rico. Ia
the letter the Argentine representative deplores such action
as a violation of Olympic principles. This ties in with the
action taken as indicated in paragraph (1) above.
C. A letter to the Venezuelan Ministry of Interior pro-
testing the visit of Venezuelan athletes to Cuba at the same
time as Cuba is inciting terrorists to action inside Venezuela.
3. Approximately 5000 copies of the AMLIRA magazine were
printed each month during the period under review. They were
distributed by news stand sale in Miami, New York and Puerto Rico;
through various sports organizations in Latin America and Spain
and by distribution as reading material on several Latin American
airlines. The AMLIRA magazine provides international sports edi-
torials of ERSFAWN value which are of specific interest to latin
American readership. Articles of propaganda significance which
1
:
}
SECRET
850XP 1
* automa
:
som likamis lissabond Sub184,924,271
•
:

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_99.jpeg ---
14-00000
ngast
:
.
SECRET
- 3 -
-
D. PLANS FOR NEXT QUARTER
8. It is probable that the next World Baseball Champion-
ships sponsored by the International Baseball Federation will
be held in Colombia. An effort will be made by the AMLIRA
group to mount an operation aimed at assuring the denial of an
invitation to participate in these championships to the Cuban
team.
9. The AMLIRA group is preparing propaganda materials for
use in a campaign to try to influence the sports authorities in
the Caribbean and Central American countries not to allow their
national teams to attend the Weight Lifting Championships to be
held during 1967 in Cuba.
*
4-7774…!
1
SECRET
-

--- Image 104-10226-10024_page_98.jpeg ---
14-00000
34
SECRET
-
2
-
:
:
:
i
appeared during this past quarter included: A story on Negro
ath etes in the U.S. refuting a Cuban claim that there was
discrimination in the selection of the U.8. Olympic team; an
articie on the disqualification of a Cuban woman athlete because
"she did not conform to the revolutionary principles of the
sports movement in Communist Cuba" and an article which refutes
the Cuban c'aim that Cuba won the tenth Central American and
Caribbean games.
4. During the quarter the AMLIRA group issued several press
releases concerning sports-newsworthy events involving Cuba and
continued the regular five minute radio programs which are heard
thirty times each week on Radio Americas beamed to Cuba and on
WHIE in Miami. In addition the AMLIKA organization provided
recorded tapes of sports interviews and commentary to 58 indepen-
dent radio stations in Puerto Rico and 14 countries in Central
and South America.
B.
ADMINISTRATIVE
5. During the second quarter of FY 67 the AMLIRA organization
expended $17,300 and had income of some $600 from news stand sales
and advertising. Both these figures are approximate projections
because the final December figures are not recorded at this
writing. The net figure for expenditures during the quarter (some
$16,700) exceeds the budgeted amount by approximately $400. However,
this overage will be absorbed in further budgetary cutbacks during
the next reporting period.
6. The AMLIRA activity expenditures also exceeded the budget
allowance during the last quarter. To remedy this situation the
following specific economy measures will go into effect beginning
1 January 1967:
One salaried employee will be dropped.
Monthly saving....$250
:
b.
Publication of monthly pamphlets with selected
offprints from the AMLIRA magazine will be
discontinued.... Approx. monthly saving....$400
$650
It is expected that there will be other savings which will bring
the total quarterly reduction in spending to about $2500.
.C.
PROBLEMS
7. There are no major unresolved problems involving the
AMLIRA activity.
SEADET
Malti
1
+
1