

--- Image 104-10175-10133_page_2.jpeg ---
k
14-00000
LEVENDERIS
After letting _and]
(1)
COMUNDURY
off on a dark side road, 1 parked by car
nearby and than walked back to my bo250.
:
1
I now that the old car,
02
* to
which we Bat
[AFRODENT
the
and/policeman was
there, so I crept through the bushes up to the wall, climbed over the back
wall of my yard, and crept along the side keeping in the shadows and trying
to see into my house to see if anybody was in there. I finally made my way
to the back door. Looked in and determined that there was not anybody in there,
but if there was I had every right to come into my own house, and I found that
I was not particularly afraid so I decided to go in. I quietly opened the
back door, came into the house, quickly looked around the corner into the
bedroom and into the bathroom, and decided that there was not anybody in there.
I walked over and closed the front door, which was wide open, quickly drew
the drapes and turned off the lights. I then changed into old clothes and
tennis shoes, got a flashlight and walked over to the kitchen window, shined
my flashlight into the face of one of the men sitting in the car just outside.
I was only able to shine it on one mans face so I held it there for a little
while then snapped it off and walked back to a good corner inside the house.
There I waited with the flashlight in hand knowing that the people outside
could not enter through the front door and if they entered through the back
"Coor I'a beable to club one of them end kick the other one before cither of
them was able to do anything. I stood there and heard them come up to the
front door and try the front door. But, when they were unsuccesful they
didn't dɔ any more or come around to the back. They then got into their car,
started it up, turned it around and drove off. While they were turning aroun
}
I went out the back door, climbed up on a sink, so I could see over the wall,
and watched them drive off. I didn't really know how many people were outside.
Nor did I know how many people had left in the car. Thinking that this might
have been a decor and that they might have left somebody behind. I silently !
climbed up' on to the roof of the house and walked across the roof and peeper.
over the edge thinking that if there was one person left behind I could jump
on him from the roof and sericusly injure him. There was not anybody there
LIKUFF-1¦
so I left the house, walked up to the landlord's house,!
1
i
and
and told the family that there had been some strange poople hanging around
when I came tone, that they had lunged for the car and mode an obvious atte
i
1

--- Image 104-10175-10133_page_1.jpeg ---
104-10175-10133
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
14-00000
:
SUBJECT: LIHUFF-1 (gil-
(301-
The attached explains the involvement
of Subject in the circumstances surrounding.
the recruitment attempt and personal harrassment
of Soviet official ABODENT (201-733422) in
June, 1968.
02
The narrative is presented by Keith 06, of
Cameron JOHNSON (201-837607), Dean of Ken
to was
at the University of the Americas,
deeply involved in the operation. While no
apparent direct or serious damage to LIHUFF-1
resulted from this, it must be borne in mind
08
that Johnson did rent his house from LIHUFF-1
and that if the Soviets ever had suspicions of
16-3
LIHUFF-1's relations with the Station, L-l's
appearance in these events might be viewed
i
by the Soviets as possibly more than coincidence.
2
:
=
:
:
=
4/RS

--- Image 104-10175-10133_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
2
( 2 )
to get at the door handle, and that I had no idea who they were etc.
I was
sufficiently scared and put the car in reverse, backed up and took it down
and parked it out of right. I explained that I had climbed over the back
wall and co ca. They were quiet aware of the problem since they had observed,
or thought they had observed, people hanging around the house all day. They
pointed out to me too, that when their 18 year old son, Eill, was riding on
horseback he encountered two men who had just arrived in a white Camaro driven
by a middleaged or younger blond lady. They got out of their car and walked
up to my house. One of them, he caid, was carrying a pipe and the other one
wɛs carrying a screwdriver. The son asked if he could help these mer but they
rushed him off saying that he couldn't . The two men peered in the front gate
and stayed around, hanging around for quite a while until a blue Chevrolet
appeared and two people got out of it and went inside the house. While
these people were inside the house, the two min outside hung around near the
house.
-
LIHUFF-1
After spending sometime in the house,
reported to me
347 11
two men came out and there was some confusion going on around the car and they
couldn't seem to be able to start it. Finally, the two men who had been inside
two men
LIHUFF-1
-
the house left and the other/got in the car and left. None of the
family was exactly sure what was going on except that there was confusion
arsund the car. Eventually all the people left one way or another.
house.
I said that I was very concerned about these people hanging around my
That I didn't like the idea of people being inside my house and I
LIHUFF-1
wanted to call the police. Mrs.
said that she had called her husband
and he was coming right home, and that he had some very good contacts in
LUPURE
and he would probably be able to help out in this matter. I !
agreed to wait until he got home and that I would go and get my car and bring
it back home, which I then did. I spent the rest of the night with the
LINUFF-ls
I visiting and as quickly as possible I moved the conversation
away from this to other colpletely unimportant things. I decided in the
LIHUFF-i
presence of.
that there probably was not any reason to get concerned
1
about thin, that it was probably just some students trying to make me look
foolish or something on that order.
J
-

--- Image 104-10175-10133_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
(3)
One thing that I forgot to mention was that firs.
And
LI!UFF-]
Was extremely
:
upset because a tall blond men/s Mexican policeman came up to her house after
the kids reported the people left. They reported that a car had been stolen.
She asked who the blond man was, and he said he wonted to call his embassy. She
brightened up and and asked if he was an American, but he said no, "URS."
One of the kids asked if "URS" meant U.R.S.C., and he made no attempt to hide
LIHUFF-1
the fact that he was from the Soviet Embassy. They barged in the
house, and in fact it was later reported that he tried to talk to Krs.
;
LINUFF-1
in Russian which upset her even more. The tall blond min used the telephone,
LIHUFF-1
and as far as Mrs. _
-
_ knows, he did call his embassy.
Earlier, when I arrived at the University behind the Russian car, I
told the Lt., for the University police force that I wanted the car towed
away at 9:30 the next morning if it was still there at the time and he cold
that he would be glad to if it was.
LIRUFF-1s
around 23:30
|
When I went to get my car after talking to the
hours. I did go down the road past the entrance to my house out to the main
highway Jr. to look around. I went down as far as The Lady's Bar. When I
passed the corner of the main highway and the road leading off from it to my
house, I saw a blue Chevrolet which looked very much like the oar we had. pushed
down to the University and some people standing around it including at least
one uniformed policeman. I concluded that this was connected with this case.
I went down to The Lady's Bar, turned around and came back up the main highway,
but from a point considerably below from where that car was parked until con-
siderably past it I kept a buɛ between those people and myself and I don't :
think, on the bases of later things that they have said, that they saw me coms
back up the hill. The bus effectively shielded mo all the way up. I went
clear up to Cuajimalpa then and turned down the road that leads to my house
so I didn't have to pass them again and went on in and parked my oar inside the
compound.
02
that
The next morning I went to the University at about 8 d'olook and noticed
ARODENT'S
blue Chevy was gone from the parking lot. Then I worked until
my secretary notified mo that none Federal plainólothes
IDEN-E
looking for
policemen were there
I immediately went to my office and found three or four
Federal policemen outside the office and unfortunately the Lt. of our police (
"IRS