

--- Image 104-10119-10367_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10119-10367
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
20 February 1970
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
SUBJECT: VAN HET REVE, Karel - #839052
REFS;
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
Reproduce
Attached Clippings from the NEW YORK TIMES atá 11 Jan 1970 and
NEWSWEEK dtd 12 Jan 1970
1. References reported that Subject, founder of the Alexander Herzen
Foundation in Amsterdam, is publishing the writings of Soviet dissenters;
notably Andrei AMALRIK, Andrei SAKHAROV, Pavel LITVINOV and Anatoly T. MARCHENKO.
24
2. [Subject was granted a POA in June 1969 for use as an informant by
SB/PO/M, W. Europe, under Project ABEGGHEAD.
Atts. Refs.
Parengold
St. NEWSWEET
i
7.
Sarah K. Hall
SRS/OS
:
BR

--- Image 104-10119-10367_page_2.jpeg ---
:
14-00000
Q
NEW YORK TIMES
✓ 11 January 1970
-New Dutch Group Is Publishing
Writings of Soviet Dissenters
By HENRY RAYMONT
A group of West European, virt waters as of the
scholars have set up a non-ized the Stolin era,
obsessive, fear, thitharacter-
profit organization, the Alex- sentative said. "They end
the re
ander Herzen Foundation in, that there is nothing in Soviet
Amsterdam to disseminate' law to prevent them from pub-
works by dissident Soviet lishing abroad and they insist
w.iters.
on exercising their rights.”
|
The purpose is to protect the
What differentiates the Her-
author's name against piracy, the émigré presses that publishi
zen Foundation from some of
political exploitation, careless manuscripts smuggled out of
Danslations and other compli- the Soviet Union, he main-
cations that have often marked) tained, is that it has the ap-
the publication in the West of proval of the authors to act
manuscripts smuggled out of as their agent abroad.
the Soviet Union.
Established in 1968
With the increasing interest
in Soviet dissent, scores of
The foundation was estab
Western publishers in recent, lished in 1968 by Dr. Karel van
months have turned to the, het Pese became friendly with.
foundation for book rights to are at the University of
such works as Andrei Amal-] Leyden, with support from at
rick's "Will the U.S.S.R. Sur- group of Dutch businessmen.
vive Until 1984?". Anatoly T.
While he was Moscow cor-1
Marchenko's ""My Testimony," respondent for a Dutch news-)
and essays by Pavel Litvinov, paper in 1967 and 1968, Dr. van
grandson of Maxim Litvinov, het Reve became friendly with
Soviet Foreign Minister under; several writers who asked to
Stalin.
be helped in getting their
books published in the West.
Though the translations re-
ceived wide notice in the West-
After he returned to Amster-
er press, little was known dam in 1968. Dr. van het Revel
about the foundation until one was joined by Dr. Jan Besemer.
of its representatives came here another Russian literature pro-
last week to explain its role fessor, who was also a news-
to United States publishers. paper correspondent in Mos-
"We received our inspiration Cow, and Peier Reddaway, a
from the enlightened efforts of lecturer at the London School
Alexander Herzen to defy to- of Economics. One of the in-
talitarian methods against Rus- stitute's principal advisers is
sian authors by publishing them Max Hayward, a translator of
in the West and sending their Russian literature.
books back through a literary:
The foundation's procédure
underground, the representa
is to publish a manuscript in]
tive, who asked not to be iden-its original Russian text, there-
tified, said in an interview. by insuring copyright, before
offering it to publishers in
Western Europe and the Unit-
Herzen Had a Journal
Herzen, an aristocratic litera-ed States.
teur and father of Russian Since it placed its first book
socialism, in 1857 started alin the West, Mr. Litvinov's
periodical, Koiokol (The Bell). "Dear Comrade"
in London to publicize his ideas here by Pitman), the organiza-
(published
and those of other dissidentsition has supervised transla-
hanned by Tsarist autocracy. tions and collected royalties
The journal established a long for the authors. It is now pre-
tradition of Russian publishing paring several test cases to de-
in exile that over the years has termine whether the authors
included such authors as Lenin, can he paid through official ac-
Gorky. Trotsky and Pasternak, counts in the Soviet State
"The new generation of So- Bank.
State

--- Image 104-10119-10367_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
12 January 1970
Underground Press
By normal city-desk standards, Karel
lict Reve wasn't much of a news-
bendin, his days as Moscow corr, spand-
for the Dutch daily Het Parool. "I
kept forgetting to ask names and ages,
he recalls. But then, van het Reve was
dly a scholar of Russian literature who
„Ionly signed on with the newspaper
mea vaý of spending a year or so in the
Nosjet Union. And now, back at his lec-
invm at Legelen University, the mild-man-
ex Abr-old ex-reporter is scoop-
the work! by breaking the story of
4, vocal hinnal opposition movement in
Maa. Through a for ulation named
+ Abksandr Herzen, the nineteenth-
Silur Russian writer who printed
Paved Russian manuscripts abroad, van
int le te has begun releasing a flood of
mal rgo and political documents and
memoirs for publication in the West.
Acting only as agent and translator, van
het Reve made headlines with the bitter,
apocalyptic pamphlet "Will the U.S.S.R.
Survive Until 19542" by youthful historian
Anrici Amalrik, which appeared in the
fall issue of the British quarterly Survey.
And Fist week, ýan het Reve gave News-
verre Robert J. Korengold an exclusive
10% at his latest triumph over Soviet
orship: a 400-page dossier on the
closed-door trial of four Russian dissi-
dents-Yuri Galanskov, Aleksandr Ginz-
burg Aleksei Dobrovolsky and Vera
Lashkova-that took place in Mosenw's
grim: Kolom hovka Street courthouse in
carly 1968.
Van Bet Reve, as it happens, “cov-
ered that trial himself, shivering with
the rest of Moscow's foreign press corps
in subzero cold on the street outside the
court. The charges were, in essence,
emdicity in the production of a “white
berk” of all gedly auti-Soviet documents
weermag the 1966 trial of writers
Yah Dan and Andrei Sinyavsky plus
alized collusion with NTS, a counter-
10
revolutionary Russian émigré group in
Frankfurt, Germany, Friends of the ac-
cused smuggled out thumbnail accounts
of each day's proceelings, and when
the trial ended, van het Reve, through
his friendship with one of the self-
appointed court recorders, came into
possession of the 120 different manu-
scripts which make up the book that
Longmans Green will publish in Britain
Tater this year.
Time: Though much of the material is
technical, courageous voices like that of
Ginzburg bring the combative atinos-
phere of the tral to life. “I thought and
I continue to think now,” be declared to
the judge, "that if 1 don't agree with
something I should express my disagree-
ment openly….. I know that you will con-
vict me because not one person charged
under Article 70 [anti-Soviet activity] has
ever been acquitted. I will go off to the
camp calmly to serve my time.
Van het Reve naturally isn't eager to
reveal how he smuggled out this mass of
documentation. "Let's just say I man-
aged," he smiles. Probably through the
time-honored methods of the plain brown
envelope and the luggage of departing.
foreigners, he and the Herzen Founda-
tion, which ironically occupies the fonner
headquarters of the Dutch Communist
Party in Amsterdam, have "managed" to
receive not only the Amalrik pamphlet
and the Ginzburg trial records, but a
steady flow of other anti-regime works
including a sharp attack on Soviet politics
by Andrei Sakharov, the noted nuclear
physicist, and a factual account of life
in the U.S.S.R.'s labor camps by Anatoly
Marchenko, who is still serving time for
"agitation,
A lapsed Stalinist turned democrat,
van het Reve insists that the Herzen.
Foundation is apolitical. "Our only aim is
to give these people a chance to publish
and that's all," he says. And if he can
keep his foundation clear of damaging
outside support and free of any profit
inctive, as it up org.
at mov
wall late con
J
"
.
by
+ 7.
1
nate the ere that was pre-
viudy booked the enption d this
sian social en abroad.
x
1
: