

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_11.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
government functions or activities, may be placed in the JFK Assassination
Records Collection;
(2)
In the case of other papers, maps, and other documentary material, the
Assassination Records Review Board may determine that a true and accurate
copy in lieu of the original may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection;
(3)
In the case of photographs, the original negative, whenever
available (otherwise, the earliest generation print that is a true and accurate
copy) may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection;
(4)
In the case of motion pictures, the camera original, whenever
available (otherwise, the earliest generation print that is a true and accurate
copy), may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection;
(5)
In the case of sound and video recordings, the original recording,
whenever available (otherwise, the earliest generation copy that is a true and
accurate copy), may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection;
(6)
In the case of machine-readable information, a true and accurate
copy of the original (duplicating all information contained in the original and in
a format that permits retrieval of the information) may be placed in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection; and
(7)
In the case of artifacts, the original objects themselves may be
-placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection.
1
23
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_10.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
(d) sound and video recordings;
(e) machine readable information in any form; and
(f) artifacts.
§1400.5
Requirement that assassination records be released in their entirety.
An assassination record shall be disclosed in its entirety except for
portions specifically postponed pursuant to the grounds for postponement of
public disclosure of records established in Sec. 6 of the ARCA, and no portion of
any assassination record shall be withheld from public disclosure solely on
►
grounds of non-relevance unless, in the Assassination Records Review Board's
sole discretion, release of part of a record is sufficient to comply with the intent
and purposes of the ARCA.
§1400.6
(a)
Originals and copies.
For purposes of determining whether originals or copies of assassination
records will be made part of the President John F. Kennedy Assassination
Records Collection (the JFK Assassination Records Collection) established under
the ARCA, the following shall apply:
(1)
In the case of papers, maps, and other documentary materials, the
Assassination Records Review Board may determine that record copies of
Government records, either the signed original, original production or a
reproduction that has been treated as the official record maintained to chronicle
22

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_12.jpeg ---
14-00000
$
DRAFT
(b)
To the extent records from foreign governments are included in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection, copies of the original records shall be sufficient
for inclusion in the collection.
(c)
In cases where a copy, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section above, is
authorized by the Assassination Records Review Board to be included in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection, the Assassination Records Review Board may,
at its discretion if it determines it to be necessary to ensure the integrity of the
JFK Assassination Records Collection, require a certified copy. In cases where an
original, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section, is required for inclusion in
the JFK Assassination Records Collection the Assassination Records Review
Board may, at its discretion, accept the best available copy. In such cases that
records included in the collection, whether originals or copies, contain illegible
portions, such records shall have attached thereto a certified transcription of the
illegible language to the extent practicable.
(d) For purposes of implementing the ARCA, the term copy means a true and
accurate photocopy duplication by a means appropriate to the medium of the
original record that preserves and displays the integrity of the record and the
information contained in it.
(e) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to suggest that additional
copies of any assassination records contained in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection are not also assassination records that, at the Assassination Records
24

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_1.jpeg ---
OGC-94-52916
19 September 1994
104-10333-10011
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
AGENCY - INTERNAL USE ONLY
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
"
14-00000
Deputy General Counsel
Robert J. Eatinger. Jr.
Assistant General Counsel
Litigation Division, OGC
DCI Sources and Methods Authority With Respect
to JFK Assassination Records
MEMORANDUM FOR:
David P. Holmes
FROM:
SUBJECT:
:
R
1. Per your request, I have attached a copy of the
President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992 (ARCA), Pub. L. 102-526, 106 Stat. 3443-3458, reprinted at
44 U.S.C. § 2107 note. For your convenience, I have highlighted
the pertinent provisions that will aid in responding to an
inquiry regarding the statute's effect on the DCI's statutory
authority to protect intelligence sources and methods.
2. The clear language and intent of the law is to supersede
statutes that prohibit disclosure of information, except for some
irrelevant subject areas, such as tax records. The statute
provides that "it shall take precedence over any other law
(except section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code), judicial
decision construing such law, or common law doctrine that would
otherwise prohibit" the disclosure of information subject to the
Act. ARCA § 11(a). This language, taken with the provisions
discussed below which limit the intelligence sources and methods
that may be protected and set a strict procedural scheme by which
information is to be reviewed under the ARCA, effectively
supersedes the DCI's National Security Act authority with respect
to intelligence sources and methods information subject to the
ARCA.
3. Section 6 of the ARCA provides the grounds for which the
release of information may be "postponed.” The statute
contemplates that all information will eventually be released.
Indeed, it specifies that all information will be made available
to the public no later than 25 years after the passage of the
ARCA (which occurred in October 1992) unless the president
certifies that continued postponement is necessary. ARCA
§ 4 (g) (2) (D). With respect to intelligence-related information,
ARCA allows postponement if:
(1) the threat to ... intelligence operations
. is
of such gravity that it outweighs the public interest, and
such public disclosure would reveal-
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE
ONLY
i
1
1
1
'
|

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_13.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
Review Board's discretion, may also be placed in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent or preclude copies
of any assassination records, and particularly assassination records in
audiovisual or machine readable formats, from being made from time to time in
the professional judgment of and at the discretion of the National Archives and
Records Administration for purposes of preservation or reformatting to conform
to different hardware and/or software requirements.
§1400.7
(a)
Additional guidance.
A government agency, office, or entity includes, for purposes of
interpreting and implementing the ARCA, all current, past, and former
departments, agencies, offices, divisions, foreign offices, bureaus, and
deliberative bodies of any federal, state, or local government and includes all
inter- or intra-agency working groups, committees, and meetings that possess or
created records relating to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
(b) The inclusion of artifacts in the scope of the term assassination
record is understood to apply solely for purposes of establishing the JFK
Assassination Records Collection and for fully implementing the terms of the
ARCA and has no direct or indirect bearing on the interpretation or
implementation of any other statute or regulation.
©
In the case of artifacts deemed to be assassination records and included in
25

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_16.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
102D CONGRESS
2d Session
}
SENATE
1
Calendar No. 552
{
REPORT
102-328
THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
RECORDS COLLECTION ACT OF 1992
REPORT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
TO ACCOMPANY
S. 3006
TO PROVIDE FOR THE EXPEDITIOUS DISCLOSURE OF RECORDS
RELEVANT TO THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F.
KENNEDY
JULY 22 (legislative day, JULY 20), 1992. -Ordered to be printed
★ 59-010
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON: 1992
1
S.Rept. 102-328 0 - 92
11
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_14.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
the JFK Assassination Records Collection, the provision to the public of
photographs, drawings, or similar materials depicting the artifacts shall be
sufficient to comply with the ARCA's requirement that copies of assassination
records be provided to the public upon request. Additional display of or
examination by the public of artifacts in the JFK Assassination Records Collection
shall occur under the terms and conditions established by the National Archives
and Records Administration to ensure their preservation and protection for
posterity.
(d)
The terms and, or, any, all, and the plural and singular forms of nouns
shall be understood in their broadest and most inclusive sense and shall not be
understood to be terms of limitation.
(e) Unless the Assassination Records Review Board in its sole discretion
directs otherwise, records that are identified with respect to a particular person
shall include all records relating to that person that use or reflect their true name
or any other name, pseudonym, codeword, symbol, number, cryptonym or alias
used to identify that person.
(f)
f
Unless the Assassination Records Review Board in its sole discretion
directs otherwise, records that are identified by the Assassination Records
Review Board with respect to a particular operation or program shall include all
records pertaining to that program by any other name, pseudonym, codeword,
symbol, number or cryptonym.-.
į
26
1
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_15.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
$1400.8
Designation.
Implementing the ARCA -- Notice of Assassination Record
(a) A Notice of Assassination Record Designation shall be the mechanism for
the Assassination Records Review Board to announce publicly its determination
that a record or group of records meets the definition of assassination records.
(b) Notice of all designations will be published in the Federal Register within
30 days of the decision to designate such records as assassination records.
In determining that a record or group of records meets the definition of
assassination records, the Assassination Records Review Board must determine
that the record or group of records will more likely than not enhance, enrich, and
broaden the historical record of the assassination.
L
|
1
:

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_17.jpeg ---
14-00000
21
tion, it is important to emphasize and clarify the legislative intent
and importance of particular provisions of the Act.
Defining assassination records
"Assassination records" are defined in Section 3. The definition
of "assassination records" is a threshold consideration for the suc-
cessful implementation of the Act. Its scope will be the barometer
of public confidence in the release of assassination records. While
the records of past presidential commissions and congressional
committees established to investigate the assassination of President
Kennedy are included as assassination records under this Act, it is
intended and emphasized that the search and disclosure of records
under this Act must go beyond those records. While such records
are valuable, they reflect the views, theories, political constraints,
and prejudices of past inquiries. Proper implementation of this Act
and providing the American public with the opportunity to judge
the surrounding history of the assassination for themselves, re-
quires including not only, but going beyond, the records of the
Warren and Rockefeller Commissions, and the Church and House
Select Assassination Committees.
-
The term "assassination record" was not more specifically de-
fined by the Committee because to do so before more is known
about the universe of records would have been premature, and
would have further injected the government between the records
and the American public. There is a sufficient volume of known as-
sassination records to organize and review at the outset. However,
it is intended that the Review Board issue guidance to assist in ar-
ticulating the scope or universe of assassination records as govern-
ment offices and the Review Board undertakes their responsibil-
ities. Such guidance will be valuable notwithstanding the fact that
government offices will begin to organize and review their records.
before the Review Board is established. Government offices are re-
quired to begin the review and disclosure of records upon enact-
ment to expedite public access to the many records which do not
require additional review or postponement. However, the ultimate
work of the Review Board will involve not only the review of
records recommended for postponement, but requiring government
offices to provide additional information and records, where appro-
priate. Guidance, especially that developed in consultation with the
public, scholars, and affected government offices, will prove valúa-
ble to ensure the fullest possible disclosure and create public confi-
dence in a working definition that was developed in an independ-
ent and open manner.
Autopsy Records
The Act specifically excludes from the definition of “assassi-
nation records" the autopsy records and copies or reproductions
made from such records donated by the Kennedy family pursuant
to a deed of gift executed on October 29, 1966. These records in-
clude the autopsy photographs and X-rays of President Kennedy.
The Committee believes that this exclusion is a sound policy. The
Committee believes that there is a compelling justification for pro-
tecting the privacy of the Kennedy family from the unwarranted
:

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_20.jpeg ---
14-00000
Federal Register / Vol. 60. No. 26 / Wodnesday, February 8, 1995 / Proposed Rules
disclosure of the fullest possiblo
historical record on this tragedy and on
` subsequent investigations and inquires
into it.
i
The Board's proposed guidance is
designed to help government agencies
and the Board identify and make
available to the public all documents
that will enhance, enrich, and broaden
the historical record of the assassination
of President John F. Kennedy. The
Board socks through this guidance to
fulfill Congress's "inten(t) and emphasis
that the search and disclosure of records
under this Act must go beyond” the
records of previous commissions and
committees established to investigate
President Kennedy's assassination. Id. at
21. The Board also soeks to provide
notice of the scope of its intended
exercise of authority to seek additional
information or records in order to fulfill
its functions and responsibilities under
the ARCA.
.
In addition, the Board proposes to
create a mechanism to facilitate the
Board's ongoing work and to further
ensure future public access to the
broadest possible historical record. This
mechanism will be known as the
"Catalog of Assassination Records"
(COAR). The COAR is intended to be an
official listing of all records determined
by the Board to meet the definition of
"assassination record" and included in
the JFK Collection.
Request for Comments
The Board seeks public comment on
its proposed interpretive regulations
intended to provide guidance on the
interpretation of the term assassination
record, the intended scope of its
exercise of authority to seek additional
information or records, and its
additional proposals for implementation
of the ARCA.
List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 1400
Administrative practice and
procedure, Archives and records.
Accordingly, the Assassination
Records Review Board hereby proposes
to establish a new chapter XIV in title
36 of the Code of Federal Regulations to
road as follows:
-
CHAPTER XIV-ASSASSINATION
RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
PART 1400-GUIDANCE FOR
INTERPRETATION AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY
ASSASSINATION RECORDS
COLLECTION ACT OF 1992 (ARCA)
Soc
1400.1 Interpretation of assassination
record.
1400.2 Interpretation of additional records
and in.fonnation.
14003 Sources of assassination recorde and
additional records and information.
7507
assassination records as well as all other
documents, indices; records, and other
matorial that disclose cryptonyms, code
names, or other identification material
in assassination records.
(b) All training manuals, instructional
materials, and guidelines created or
used by the agencies in furthorance of
their review of assassination records.
(c) All records, lists, and documents
describing the procedure by which the
agencies identified or selected
assassination records for review.
(d) Organizational charts of
government agencies.
1400.4 Types of materials included in scope describe the agency's:
(6) Records necessary and sufficient to
of assassination record and additional
records and information.
1400.5 Requirement that assassination
records be released in their entirely
1400.6 Originals and copies.
1400.7 Additional guidance
(1) Records policies and schedules:
(2) Filing systems and organization;
and
(3) Storage facilities and locations.
1400 8 Implementing the ARCA-Catalog of $1400.3 Sources of assassination records
Assassination Records
Authority: 44 US.C. 2107 note.
§ 1400.1 Interpretation of assassination
record.
(a) An assassination record includes,
but is not limited to, all records, public
and private, regardless of how labeled or
identified, that document, describe.
report, analyze, or interpret activities
and events that may have led to the
assassination of President John F.
Kennedy; the assassination itself; and
Investigations of or inquiries into the
assassination.
(b) An assassination record further
includes, without limitation:
(1) All records as defined in Soc. 3(2)
of the ARCA:
(2) All records called by or segregated
by all foderal, state, and local
government agencies in conjunction
with any investigation or analysis of or
Inquiry into the assassination of
President Kennedy (for example, any
intra-agency investigation or analysis of
or inquiry into the assassination; any
inter-agency communication regarding
the assassination; any request by the
House Select Committee on
Assassinations to collect documents and
other materials; or any inter- or intra-
agency collection or segregation of
documents and other materials);
(3) Other records or groups of records
listed in the Catalog of Assassination
Records, as described in § 1400.8 of this
chapter.
$1400.2 Interpretation of additional
records and Information.
The term additional information and
records includes:
(a) All documents used by
government offices and agencies during
their declassification review of
and additional records and Information.
Assassination records and additional
records and information may be located..
at, or under the control of, without
limitation:
(a) Agencies, offices, and entities of
the executive, legislativo, and judicial
branches of the federal government;
(b) Agencies, offices, and entities of
the executive, legislative, and judicial
branches of state and local governments;
(c) Record repositories and archives of
foderal, state, and local governments.
including presidential librarios;
(d) Record repositories and archives
of universities, libraries, historical
societies, and other similar
organizations;
(e) Individuals who possess such
records by virtue of service with a
government agency, office, or entity;
(f) Persons, including individuals and
corporations, who have obtained such
records from sources identified in
paragraphs (a) through (e) of this
soction:
(g) Federal, state, and local courts_
where such records are being hold
undor seal; or
(h) Foreign governments.
$ 1400.4 Types of materials included in
scope of assassination record and
additional records and Information.
-
The term record in assassination
record and additional records and
information includos, for purposes of
interpreting and implementing the
ARCA:
(a) Papers, maps, and other
documentary material;
(b) Photographs;
(c) Motion pictures;
(d) Sound and video recordings:
(6) Machine readable information in
any form; and
•
**

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
SUBJECT:
DCI Sources and Methods Authority With Respect to JFK
Assassination Records
(A) an intelligence agent whose identity currently
requires protection;
(B) an intelligence source or method which is
currently utilized, or reasonably expected to be
utilized, by the United States Government and which has
not been officially disclosed, the disclosure of which
would interfere with the conduct of intelligence
activities; or
(C) any other matter currently relating to
intelligence operations ... the disclosure of which
would demonstrably impair the national security of the
United States."
ARCA § 6(1) (Emphasis added.)
4.
The originating agency is to make the first review to
identify information that meets the standards for postponement.
ARCA § 4 (c) (2) (D) (i). For CIA, this effort is being undertaken
by the Historical Review Group, in consultation with the
Directorate of Operations and other appropriate Agency
components. Information the originating agencies identify for
postponement must be transmitted to the Review Board. ARCA
§ 4 (c) (2) (E). The Review Board "shall consider and render
decisions on a determination by a Government office to seek to
postpone the disclosure of assassination records." ARCA §
7 (1) (1). Specifically, the "Review Board shall consider and
render decisions on ... whether an assassination record or
particular information in a record qualifies for postponement of
disclosure under the Act." ARCA § 7(i) (2) (B).
5. If the Review Board determines to order the disclosure
of information that the originating agency felt met the criteria
for postponement, it "shall notify the head of the originating
body of its determination and publish a copy of the determination
in the Federal Register within 14 days after the determination is
made." ARCA § 9 (c) (4) (A). If the information contained in an
assassination record is "obtained or developed solely within the
executive branch, the President shall have the sole and
nondĕlegable authority to require the disclosure or postponement
of ... the information under the standards set forth in
Section 6." ARCA § 9 (d) (1) (emphasis added). The President's
decision must be certified to the Review Board within 30 days of
the Review Boards determination. Id. Records postponed by the
· President must be re-reviewed every 5 years. ARCA § 9 (d) (2).
1
2
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
|
I
1
1
E

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_22.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE
-
INTERNAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR: D/IM/ADDA/IS
DCI/IRO
DA/IRO
FROM:
SUBJECT:
DI/IRO
DO/IRO
CSI-0316/95
16 February 1995
DS&T/IRO
OGC (Bob Eatinger)
DD/OCA
C/IP&CRD
C/RDP/MSG/OIT
John Pereira
Historical Review Group
JFK Assassination Records
Proposed Regulations
1. Attached for your review and comment is a copy of
proposed regulations prepared by the JFK Assassination
Records Review Board. The regulations focus on the
definition of "assassination record", which is very broad.
The possibility of requiring additional records searches is
raised.
2. The Board plans to discuss the regulations at its
next meeting on 6-7 March, so it would be helpful to give
the Board our input in advance of that meeting. Please
provide Barry Harrelson (x30292) or me (x30373) with your
comments by 1 March.
John Paraira
John F. Pereira
Attachment
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
1
!
!

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_18.jpeg ---
14-00000
!
i
19
the date of enactment unless, in the case of executive branch
records, the President demonstrates that public disclosure will
result in an identifiable harm to the national security, intelligence
operations, or foreign relations of the United States.
The Assassination Records Review Board is an independent
agency within the executive branch. The five-member Review
Board will be appointed by the President with the advice and con-
sent of the United States Senate. The confirmation hearings will be
conducted by the Committee on Governmental Affairs. The Act re-
quires that the Review Board include at least one historian and
one attorney, and that each member is a national recognized pro-
fessional in his or her field. The legislation requires that prior to
making the appointments, the President is required to consider rec-
ommendations from the American Historical Association, the Orga-
nization of American Historians, the Society of American Archi-
vists, and the American Bar Association.
To ensure a comprehensive search and disclosure of assassination
records, particularly to enable the public to obtain information and
records beyond the scope of previous official inquiries, the Review
Board has the authority to direct any government office to produce
additional information and records which it believes are related to
the assassination. It has the authority to subpoena private persons
and to enforce the subpoenas through the courts.
The Review Board is authorized for a two-year period and it may
be extended by a majority vote of the Review Board for up to an
additional year. The Review Board could decide to extend it exist-
ence to less than one year if that is the time determined as neces-
sary to complete its work. Annual financial reports and other peri-
odic reports are required to be provided to the Congress. The re-
ports must include statements of progress, the level of cooperation
of government offices and agencies, and the possible need for addi-
tional time or authority from Congress.
IV. BACKGROUND AND NEED FOR LEGISLATION
0
On November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassi-
nated. It was a tragic and defining moment in American history.
The desire by the American public to understand who assassinated
President Kennedy, and why, has resulted in several official inves-
tigations and a broad spectrum of private inquiries and scholar-
ship. Unfortunately, in the eyes of the public, each investigation
and inquiry served to raise additional questions, and did so while
increasing the volume of secret government records about the as-
sassination. In 1992, the public demand, fostered by increased
media attention, the opening of secret files by changing govern-
ments around the world, and other factors, culminated in the rec-
ognition by the Congress and the Executive Branch that the
records related to the assassination of President Kennedy should be
fully disclosed.
In addition to the legislation considered by the Committee, and
its counterpart considered by the House Committee on Government
Operations, four other related, though more limited, measures:
were introduced in the House of Representatives in 1992. Two bills
mandating the release of all Kennedy assassination investigation
:
i
:
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_19.jpeg ---
14-00000
•
7506
✓ Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 26 / Wednesday, February 8, 1995 / Proposed Rules
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-5 and
above, $25; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,¨™
$25.
(vi) The copayment for prescription
drugs per prescription, for a maximum
30-day supply. is as follows:
(A) For dependents of active duty
mombors in pay grades E-1 through E-
4. $5;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-S and
above, $5; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
$9.
(vii) The copayment for ambulanco
services is as follows:
(A) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-1 through ·
E 4. $10;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-S and
above, $15; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
$20..
(e) Inpatient cost sharing
requirements under the Uniform HMO
Benefit.-(1) In general. In lieu of usual
CHAMPUS cost sharing requirements
(see § 199.4(f)), special cost sharing
amounts are required. The specific
requirements shall be uniform and shall
be published as a notice annually by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health
Affairs)
(2) Structure of cost sharing. For
servicos other than mental illness or
substance use treatment, there is a
nominal copayment for active duty
dependents and for retired members,
dependents of retired members, and
survivors. For inpatient mental health
and substance use treatment, a separate
per day charge is established.
(3) Amount of inpatient cost sharing
requirements. Beginning in fiscal year
1995, the inpatient cost sharing
requirements are as follows:
(i) For acute care admissions and
other non-mental health/substance use
treatment admissions, the per diem
charge is as follows, with a minimum
charge of $25 per admission:
(A) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades E-1 through E-
4. $11;
(B) For dependents of activo duty
members in pay grades of E-5 and
abovo, $11; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
$11.
(ii) For mental health/substance use
treatment admissions, and for partial
hospitalization services, the per diem
charge is as follows, with a minimum
charge of $25 per admission:
(A) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades E-1 through E-
4. $20;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-5 and
above, $20; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
$40.
(f) Updates. The enrollment fees for
fiscal year 1995 set under paragraph (c)
of this section and the per services
specific dollar amounts for fiscal year
1995 set under paragraphs (d) and (e) of
this section may be updated for
subsequent years to the extent necessary.
to maintain compliance with statutory
requirements pertaining to government
costs. This updating does not apply to
cost sharing that is expressed as a
porcentage of allowable charges; these
percentages will remain unchanged.
(g) Applicability of the Uniform HMO
Benefit to Uniformed Services
Treatment Facilities Managed Care
Program. The provisions of this section
concerning the Uniform HMO Benefit
shall apply to the Uniformed Services
Treatment Facilities Managed Care
Program, effective October 1, 1995.
Under that program, non-CHAMPUS
eligible beneficiaries have the same
payment responsibilities as CHAMPUS.
eligible beneficiaries.
Dated. February 2, 1995.
LM. Bynum,
Alternate OSD Federal Register Liaison
Officer, Department of Defense.
[FR Doc. 95-3028 Filed 2-7-95, 8 45 aru]
BILLING CODE 6000-04-M
ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW
BOARD
36 CFR Part 1400
Guidance on Interpreting and
Implementing the President John F.
Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection Act of 1992
AGENCY: Assassination Records Review
Board (ARRB).
ACTION: Proposed interpretive
regulation.
SUMMARY: The ARRB proposes to issue
regulations providing guidance on the
interpretation of certain terms defined
in and the implementation of the
President John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992.
DATES: To be considered, comments
•
between the hours of 9:30 am, and 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday (except
legal holidays). Comments may also be
faxed to the Board at (202) 724-0457.
Comments received may be inspected in
the Board's public reading room, located
at the address shown above, between 10
a.m. and 3 p.m. Monday through Friday
(except legal holidays). Parsons wishing
to inspect comments in the Board's
public reading room should call the
Board's office beforehand at (202) 724–
0088 for further information.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Sheryl L. Walter (General Counsel),
(202) 724-0088.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background
The President John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992, 44 U.S.C. 2107 note (as amended)
(ARCA), established the President John
F. Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection (the JFK Collection) at the
National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA). In establishing
records relating to the assassination,
the process for public disclosure of all
Congress created an independent agency
within the executive branch, the
Assassination Records Review Board
(the Board), which consists of five
citizens appointed by the President.
Under the statute, the Board is
empowered to decide "whether a record
constitutes an assassination record." 44
U.S C. 2107 note, Sec. 7(1)(2)(A).
Congress further made clear its intent
that the Board "issue guidance to assist
in articulating the scope or universe of
assassination records." President John
F. Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection Act of 1992, S.Rep. 102–328.
102d Cong., 2d Sess. (1992) at 21.
In constructing the proposed guidance
set out here, the Board seeks to
implement congressional intent that the
JFK Collection contain "the most
comprehensive disclosure of records'
related to the assassination of President
Kennedy." Id. at 18. The Board is also
mindful of Congress's instruction that
the Board apply a "broad and
encompassing" working definition of
"assassination record" in order to
achieve the goal of assembling the
fullest historical record on this tragic
event in American history and on the
investigations that were undertaken in ·
the assassination's aftermath. The Board
must be received on or before March 10. recognizes that many agencies have
1995.
ADDRESSES: Comments should be
mailed to the Assassination Records
Review Board at 600 E Street, NW.
Second floor, Washington, D.C. 20530 or
delivered in person to that address
already begun to organize and review
records responsive to the ARCA even
before the Board was appointed and
began its work. Nevertheless, the
Board's aim is that this guidance will
ald in the ultimate assombly and public
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_23.jpeg ---
14-00000
Va
1.)
15.00
AKKI
001
facsimile
TRANSMITTAL
to:
fax #:
re:
date:
pages:
Dear John:
John Pereira, CIA Historical Review Program
(703) 243-8343
ARRB proposed interpretive regulations.
February 9, 1995
4, including cover sheet.
Following this cover sheet is a courtesy copy of the Assassination
Records Review Board's proposed interpretive regulations, published yesterday in the
Federal Register. The proposed regulations include guidance on interpretation of the
scope of certain provisions of the Assassination Records Collection Act, including the
terms "assassination record" and "additional records and information." The Board is
soliciting comment from all interested parties and would welcome any comments that
the CIA may have. (The comment period is 30 days; the deadline is March 10.)
If you have any questions or need any additional information, please
don't hesitate to give me a call on my direct line or at our main number, 724-0088.
Sincerely,
They
Sher. Walter
General Counsel
From the desk of
Sheryl L. Walter
General Counsel
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street, NW, Second Floor
Washington, D.C. 20530
(202) 724-0815
Fax (202) 724-0457

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_24.jpeg ---
14-00000
f
To: C/HRG
27 February 1995
Subj: Review Board's Proposed Regulations
1400.2(e)(3), Storage facilities and locations, presents a
possible conflict with our continuing protection of WTC.
1400.5, Requirement that assassination records be released
in their entirety...and no portion withheld solely on
grounds of non-relevance. For that portion of the documents
we have declared non-relevant that is operational and is
clearly non-relevant we should argue strongly with the
Board. The Director's statutory responsibility for the
protection of sources and methods must be defended; and we
can be sure that it was not anticipated that a KGB officer
in Mexico City would be transferred to another country and
go on generating much operational information. Furthermore,
we saw it as the Board's responsibility to review the
records we identified as non-relevant and to support
publicly those of our decisions that they felt were
justified!
1400.6, Originals and copies, could cause problems if the
Board gets fussy about it. Originals of memos sent outside
the agency would be gone (to the addressee). Originals of
cables and despatches are virtually non-existant.
1400.8(c), "...the Board must determine that the record or
group of records will more likely than not enhance, enrich,
and broaden the historical record..” Like some of this stuff
might be non-relevant?
|
Frank
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_28.jpeg ---
14-00000
t
CC:
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
6. Please call me with any questions or suggestions.
Robert J. Eatinger, Jr.
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
!

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_29.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
TO:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
John N. Greer @ DCI
John F. Pereira
03/02/95 05:07:45 PM
Re: Proposed Regs by JFK Assassination Records Review Board
A number of us have concerns about the broad approach in the proposed regs. Among others, Bob Eatinger has written a memo on the
subject. We are preparing a formal response for the Board, which will be sent around for comment
In the meantime, I have had an informal discussion with the Board's Executive Director, David Marwell, advising him of our concerns. He
has invited us to propose specific textual changes.
The Board's deadline is 10 March.
Any additional thoughts would be welcome
CC:
Edmund Cohen @ DA @ DCI, J. Edwin Dietel @ DA @ DCI, Edward P. Moffett @ DCI, Thomas J. Benjamin @ DCI
1
i
1
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_26.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY
From the Desk of Robert J. Eatinger
NOTE FOR:
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Here is advance copy:
Robert J. Eatinger
03/01/95 01:46:44 PM
Comments on proposed JFK reg
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
OGC-95-50522
1 March 1995
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, Historical Review Group
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Robert J. Eatinger, Jr.
Assistant General Counsel
Litigation Division, OGC
Comments on JFK Assassination Records Proposed
Regulation
1.
The following are my comments on the Assassination
Records Review Boards proposed interpretive regulations published
in the Federal Register on 8 February 1995.
2. The term assassination record is defined in the
President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992, Pub.L. 102-525, 106 Stat. 3443, Oct. 26, 1992, reprinted at
44 U.S.C. § 2107 note (the Act). Any interpretive definition by
the Board cannot exceed that in the Act. The Acts definition is
found in Section 3(2) and provides:
(a) Assassination record means a record that is related to
the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, that was
created or made available for use by, obtained by, or
otherwise came into possession of
various Federal, State, or local government bodies.
3. The proposed regulation is broader than that in the Act.
The proposed regulation includes as assassination records:
records, public and private, regardless of how labeled or
identified, that document, describe, report, analyze, or
interpret activities and events that may have led to the
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_21.jpeg ---
14-00000
•
7508
✔ Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 26 / Wednesday, February 8, 1995 / Proposed Rules
(f) Artifacts.
§ 1400.5 Requirement that assassination
records be released in their entirety.
An assassination record shall be
disclosed in its entirety except for
portions specifically postponed
pursuant to the grounds for
postponement of public disclosure of
records established in section 6 of the
ARCA, and no portions of any
assassination records shall be withheld
from public disclosure solely an
grounds of non-relevance.
$1400.6 Originals and coples.
(a) For purposes of determining
whether originals or copies of
assassination records may be made part
of the President John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection (the
JFK Records Collection) to be
established under the ARCA:
·
(1) In the case of papers, maps, and
other documentary material, the
Assassination Records Review Board
(the Board) may determine that a true
and accurate copy of the original is
sufficient;
(2) In the case of photographs, the
term record means the original negative
if available, otherwise, the earliest
generation print;
(3) In the case of motion pictures, the
term record means the camera original
if available, otherwise, the earliest
generation print,
(4) In the case of sound and video
recordings, the term record means the
original recording, if available,
otherwise, the earliest generation copy:
(5) In the case of machine-readable
information, the Board may determine
that a true and accurate copy of the
original is sufficient; and
(6) Artifacts means the original object
itsolf.
(b) In cases where a copy, as defined
in paragraph (a) of this section is
authorized by the Board to be included
in the JFK Records Collection the Board
may, at its discretion, require a certified
copy. In cases where an original, as
defined in paragraph (a) of this section,
is required for inclusion in the JFK
Records Collection the Board may, at its
discretion, accept the best available
copy.
§ 1400.7 Additional guidance.
(a) A governnient agency, office, or
entity includes, for purposes of
interpreting and implementing the
ARCA, all departments, agencies,
offices, divisions, foreign offices,
buroaus, and deliberative bodies of any
federal, state, or local government and
includes all inter- or intra-agency
working groups, committees, and
moetings that possess or created records
relating to the assassination of President
John F. Kennedy.
(b) The inclusion of artifacts in the
Dated: February 3, 1995.
David G. Marwell,
Executive Director, Assassination Records
Review Board.
BILLING CODE 8820-TO-M
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
scope of the term assassination record is (FR Doc. 95–3112 Filed 2-7-95; 8:45 am
understood to apply solely for purposes
of establishing the President John F.
Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection and for fully implementing
the terms of the ARCA and has no direct
or indirect bearing on the interpretation
or implementation of any other statute
or regulation.
(c) In the case of artifacts deemed to
be assassination records and included in
the John F. Kennedy Assassination
Records Collection, provision to the
public of photographs, drawings, or
similar materials depicting Use artifacts
shall be sufficient to comply with the
ARCA's requirament that copies of
assassination records be provided to the
public upon request. Other display to or
examination by the public of artifacts in
the John F. Kennedy Assassination
Records Collection shall occur under
terms and conditions established by the
National Archives and Records
Administration that are adequato to
preserve and protect the artifacts for
posterity.
(d) The terus and, or, any, oll, and the
plural and singular forms of nouns shall
be understood in their broadcast and
most inclusive sense and shall not be
understood to be terms of limitation.
Any records identified with respect to a
particular person also includes any
records for that person by any other
name, pseudonym, codeword, symbol,
number, cryptonyın or alias. Any record
described with respect to an operation
or program includes any record
pertaining to that program by any other
name, pseudonyın, codeword, symbol,
number or cryptonym.
AGENCY
40 CFR Parts 51 and 93
[FAL-5149–9]
Transportation Conformity Rule
Amendments: Transition to the Control
Strategy Period
AGENCY: Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
ACTION: Proposed rula.
SUMMARY: This action proposes to
permanently align the timing of certain
transportation conformity consequences
with the imposition of Clean Air Act
highway sanctions. For ozone
nonastajument areas with an incomplete...
15% emissions-roduction state
implementation plan with a protective
finding; incomplete ozone attainment/
3% rate-of-progress plan; or finding of
failure to submit an ozone attainment/
3% rate-of-progress plan, and areas
whose control strategy implementation
plan for ozone, carbon monoxide.
·particulate matter, or nitrogen dioxide is
disapproved with a protective finding,
the conformity status of the
transportation plan and program would
not lapse as a result of such failure until
highway sanctions for such failure are
effective under other Clean Air Act
sections.
This action would delay the lapse in
conformity status, which would
otherwise prevent approval of now
highway and transit projects, and allow
States more time to prevent the lapse by
submitting complete ozone
$1400.8 Implementing the ARCA-Catalog implementation plans.
of Assassination Records.
(a) A Catalog of Assassination Records
(COAR) shall be created as the official
listing of all records determined by the
Board to meet the definition of
assassination record.
(b) Notice of all decisions to include
records in the COAR will be-published
in the Federal Register within 30 days
of the decision.
(c) In listing records or groups of
records in the COAR, the Board must
determine that the record or group of
records will more likely than not
enhance, enrich, and broaden the
historical record of the assassination.
EPA has published in the final rule
section of this Federal Register a similar
interim final rule which takes effect
immediately and applies for six months.
This proposal would apply the
provisions of the interim final rule
permanently.
DATES: Comments on this action must be
received by March 10, 1995. A public
hearing will be held at 10:30 a.m. on
February 22, 1995 in Washington, DC.
ADDRESSES: Interested parties may
submit written comments (in duplicate,
if possible) to: Air and Radiation Docket
and Information Center, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
Attention: Docket No. A-95–02, 401 M
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460.
I

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_25.jpeg ---
14-00000
New Notc
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Edward P. Moffett @ DCI
John N. Greer
02/27/95 06:02:46 PM
JFK Records
This is in response to your request that I review AGAF the propused regulations by the JFK
Assassination Records Review Board.
I see Sheryl Walters hand very much in evidence here I see from the attachment that she is the Board's
GC.
Like you, I am very concerned about the breadth of the reg's definitions. The key to keep in mind is the
statutory authority for the Board. I would argue that the definition of "a33assination record" in the statute
(44 U.S.C. section 2107 note, section 3(2) of the Act) is more limited than the reg. The statute defines an
assassination record as one "related" to the assassination of JFK. Thus, when section 1400.2 (d) and (ei
of the reg authorize Board access to organizational charts of governmental agencies and records
necessary and sufficient to describe the agency's records policies and schedules, filing systems and
organization, and storage facilities and locations, I would argue that such information is way too far afield.
There is no way we can allow the Board to have access to this information, which in any event is
prohibited by section 403g from disclosure notwithstanding any other law
The same issue arises with respect to section 1400.7(d) of the reg that proposes to include in the
definition of record any records for a person by another name or personal identifier. This would appear to
authorize Board access to all information about an agent who may have only been tangentially involved in
the assassination but whose crypt is given in many other unrelated documents about unrelated
operations. Talk about your camel's nose under the tent!
Finally, section 1400.5 of the reg raises an old dog of an issue. The National Security Archive (Sheryl's
old employer) has been fighting for a long time in FOIA litigation that the FOIA refers to records and that
therefore all information in a responsive record must be released unless otherwise exempt. There is no
FOIA exemption, they argue, for non-responsive material in a record. This is a big problem for multi-topic
"documents, such as the NID. We of course, argue that agencies are only required to process that which
is asked for and delete non-responsive material as unrequested. The proposed reg would mean that the
Board would have access to all Information in a documem about several unrelated operations or events if
that document even mentioned the assassination or anything related to it. Again, the caniel's nose
CC:
Thomas J. Benjamin@ DCI
1
i
1
i
1
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
DCI Sources and Methods Authority With Respect to JFK
Assassination Records
6. I would be happy to discuss this further if you so
desire. You might also want to contact John Pereira (×30373)
since he has met with some or all of the Review Board members.
SUBJECT:
Attachment
¦
Rato
Robert J. Eatinger, Jr
1
I
3
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
1
i

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_27.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
assassination of President John F. Kennedy; the
assassination itself; and investigations of or inquiries
into the assassination.
First,
§ 1400.1(a). This language in overbroad in two respects.
the phrase events that may have led to is both broader than
relates to as in the Act and provides no articulable standard.
For instance, the theme in the Oliver Stone movie JFK appears to
be that President Kennedy was assassinated as a result of a
conspiracy to keep the war in Vietnam from winding down. Under
the proposed regulation, the Board might consider all records
concerning the war in Vietnam during the Kennedy Administration
as being assassination records. Without a standard, the phrase
is permits arbitrary and inconsistent application. Third, it
includes information about investigations and inquiries other
than those conducted by those entities identified in the Act.
Although the Board states that it is following the intent of
Congress in seeking the most comprehensive disclosure of records
related to the assassination, it appears the Board may be
exceeding its authority.
4. The definition further states that assassination record
includes, without limitation ... all records as defined in Sec.
3 (2) of the ARCA. See § 1400.1(b)(1). Thus, by its terms it
exceeds the statutory definition. Further, it is unhelpful
because by refusing to limit itself to any articulable class of
records it remains unlimited and subject to constant
re-interpretation by the Board.
5.
The proposed definition of additional information and
records under proposed § 1400.2 is objectionable because the
regulation does not provide the intended use of the definition.
The Board may be attempting to provide a definițion useful in
interpreting the Boards authority under $7 (j) (1) (C) (ii) of the
Act:
The Review Board shall have the authority to act in a manner
prescribed under this Act including authority to ... direct
a Government office to make available to the Review Board,
and if necessary investigate the facts surrounding,
additional information, records, or testimony from
individuals, which the Review Board has reason to believe is
required to fulfill its functions and responsibilities under
this Act....
:
(Emphasis added.) If this is the case, the Board should
expressly so state and provide opportunity for informed comment
on that application. For instance, proposed § 1400.2 (a) includes
all documents used by the agency during its declassification
review. This definition could include requests for legal advice
on particular matters. Such advice would be protected within the
particular agency by attorney-client privilege and should not be
provided to an extra-agency body.
|
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_30.jpeg ---
14-00000
¡
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
From the Desk of John N. Greer
John F. Pereira @ DA
OCA
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
John N. Greer
03/02/95 04:22:48 PM
Proposed Regs by JFK Assassination Records Review Board
NOTE FOR:
Edmund Cohen @ DA
J. Edwin Dietel @ DA
1
Page and I are very concerned about the overly broad reach of the proposed regulations of the JFK Board. I have prepared specific
comments that I will send by separate cover. In essence, we are concerned that the regs reach too far into Agency records and stray too
far from the definition of an "assassination record" in the law. What input does CIA have into this process and what are the time
constraints? It looks like a power grab. It seems to us that Cohen should engage immediately in his role as Chair of the Agency Release
Panel. The full ARP might wish to address these issues at it 9 March meeting. Please advise.
CC:
Edward P. Moffett @ DCI
Thomas J. Benjamin @ DCI
i
1
1
1
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
t
i
1
2
1
1
1
1
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_33.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
MEMORANDUM FOR:
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
Jane C. Heishman
FROM:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
JFK Assassination Records Proposed Regulations
Per your request, Anthony Frasketi concurs with the proposed regulation.
CC:
James J. Boney @ DST
Anthony R. Frasketi @ DST
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
I
9 March 1995

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_32.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR: Bob Eatinger, OGC
SUBJECT: JFK Proposed Regulations
7 March 1995
As we discussed, I would appreciate your view as to
whether OGC should send a separate paper to the JFK Board on
the proposed regulations.
The attached is what we in HRG propose to coordinate in
the Agency today, 7 March, depending on your view. I'll
hold off circulating the attached draft for comment until
I've heard from you.
(The Board asks for comments by 10 March.)
Thi P
John Pereira
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_34.jpeg ---
14-00000
15
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR:
D/IM/ADDA/IS
DCI/IRO
DA/IRO
FROM:
CSI-0319/95
8 March 1995
DI/IRO
DO/IRO
DS&T/IRO
OGC (Bob Eatinger)
DD/OCA
C/IP&CRD
C/RDP/MSG/OIT
John Pereira
Historical Review Group
SUBJECT:
JFK Assassination Records
Proposed Regulations
Please review attached draft comments on the proposed
regulations prepared by the JFK Assassination Review Board.
Our deadline for comments to the Board is 10 March, so
please send me or Barry Harrelson your suggestions by cob
9 March
Attachments
John Perind
John Pereira
O
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_31.jpeg ---
14-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
Gloria M. Boyd
03/02/95 09:25:33 AM
Response to the JFK Proposed Regulation
This vehicle seemed to be the best one available to pass my "bullets" to you. Perhaps you can dump them in a Word file and
ammend them with your thoughts.
1400.1 Interpretation of Assassination Record
a.) non-limiting descriptor "may have led to the assassination" Ee
makes us vulnerable for capricious search demands
1400.2 Interpretation of Additional Records
1400.5
a.) and b.) This relates to Agency classified resources that refer to
the total Agency mission. - well beyond the "assassination" subject.
Identification of all such resources will require a separate effort
requiring substantial resources. In addition it may be impossible to
identify all such specific resources as the review effort involved
many people having experience throughout the Agency.
These resources are classified and most probably would be
recommended for "indefinite" postponement.
d.) and e.) Information described in these sections has been and is
protected by the National Security Act
As a time period for this information is not stated it is thus implied to
be open ended and that all such information would be made
available.
Requirement That Assassintion Records Be Released In Their
Entirety
- Nonrelevance issue will most likely result in marked increase in
postponed records.
1400.6 Originals and Copies
a.) Large portion of CIA's JFK collection is comprised of copies. A
search for originals will require a massive resource commitment.
There are additionally a substantial number of previously sanitized
documents in the collections.
1400.7 Additional Guidance
d.) Application of this requirement may well jeopardize current
postponements aimed at protecting Agency personnel and sources
This requirement also implies a new generation of searches to
"round-out" or to verify previous searches and retrieved
material..
31 of report
says
R.R should
"
on a reasonable
act on a
basis" in requesting
additional info/record.
Major Concern
201 & OP files
or in
If an indivictual's
minor involvement in
the JFK story
anti Cuban activities
make his complete
file for all files on
the midividual) we
I will have a majc
majch
soarce protection
privacy problem
CC:
i
1
1
1
1
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_35.jpeg ---
14-00000
Mr. David Marwell
1
8 Man
Dear David,
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the
Assassination Records Review Board's proposed interpretive
regulations as published in the Federal Register, February
8, 1995. We recognize the value of providing guidance for
those who are responsible for implementing the Assassination
Records Collection Act.
Our general view is that the regulations are
comprehensive in identifying the range of records that would
potentially be relevant to the JFK assassination or the
scope of the investigations into the assassination.
In a few sections of the regulations the wording seems
somewhat overly broad or the meaning is not clear. Attached
for the Board's consideration are comments on these
sections. In some parts of the text we suggest possible
changes in wording for purposes of clarification.
We would be pleased to discuss these comments at the
Board's convenience. It is our intention to continue
cooperating fully with the Board and to make every effort to
release assassination records held by the Agency.
John F. Pereira
Historical Review Group, CIA

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_36.jpeg ---
14-00000
Following are CIA's comments on specific sections of the
Assassination Records Review Board's interpretive
regulations, as published in the Federal Register, February
8, 1995.
1. Section 1400.1 Interpretation of Assassination Record
In paragraph (a) the reference to “activities and events
that may have led to the assassination--” seems overly
broad, and appears to go beyond the limits established in
the Assassination Records Collection Act. We believe that
it would be helpful to include an articulable standard in
this section. The present text would permit inconsistent
application of the regulations, which might encourage
massive and expensive, additional records searches that are
of doubtful value.
The following change is suggested in paragraph (a):
“activities and events that may reasonably be
considered to have led to the assassination--” (This would
be consistent with the Act.)
2. Section 1400.2 Interpretation of additional records and
information
Paragraph (a) raises a question as to the purpose and
definition of “additional records and information. The
meaning of the phrase "all documents used--during
declassification review of assassination records as well as
all other documents--"seems unclear. Is it the intention to
include any document, book, index, record system, etc.
regardless of relevance to the assassination or
investigations, including for example, legal opinions?
assume that the purpose is to enable the Board to request
and review additional records.
We
We suggest that the section be made more specific,
including a clearer statement of the intent. For example,
with respect to cryptonyms, codewords, guides, etc. a more
precise link to events related to the assassination or to a
timeframe could be helpful.

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_37.jpeg ---
14-00000
3.
Section 1400.5 Requirement that assassination records
be released in their entirety
"
The introductory paragraph specifies that "no portions
of any assassination record shall be withheld--solely on
grounds of non-relevance. This appears to open the door
for access to entire documents that contain information on
sensitive activities even when the documents contain.
information that is only incidental to the assassination,
such as a passing reference to a name. There is a potential
risk that sensitive, non-relevant sources and methods would
be compromised.
We suggest that the Board consider adding wording to this
section that accommodates those instances when there is a
need to release ample information from a document to
disclose assassination-related material, while still
protecting obviously unrelated, sensitive information.
Board, of course, would continue to have access to the
entire record.
The
4. Section 1400.7
Additional guidance
Paragraph (d) states "any records identified with
respect to a particular person also includes any records for
that person by any other name, pseudonym, codeword,” etc.
This appears to require that all records on any individuals
who are merely mentioned in an assassination record be made
available. Is the objective really to assure that all files
on an individual or activity be made available regardless of
the labels on the files? If so, we suggest that the text be
modified to reflect this.

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_39.jpeg ---
14-00000
2. Gericaal comment
This page is
Extonged
From
In the letter to David, I would add at the end of the third
paragraph:
“Our Office of General Counsel provided some legal comments
on the scope of the definition that we've included in the
attached.
3/10/95
In the attachment under the comments to Section 1400.1:
After the first sentence, ending with “beyond the limits
established by the [ARCA]", I suggest adding the following
sentences:
"The Act authorized the Board to issue interpretive
regulations. Interpretive regulations, while entitled to great
deference, cannot be inconsistent with the congressional intent
to cover only certain specific activities. Rather, they should
stay within the clearly articulated definitions provided by
Congress. This is particularly important with respect to the
definition of “assassination records" since the ARCA has a
overriding effect on other statutory grants of power found
necessary in the interests of national security, such as the
National Security Act's direction that the Director of Central
Intelligence protect intelligence sources and methods from
unauthorized disclosure. The ARCA provides a statutory standard
for protecting or “postponing” intelligence sources and methods"
that applies only to "assassination records." The standard in
the ARCA restricts those sources and methods that can be
protected in assassination records. The Review Board is given
the ultimate authority to apply that standard, subject to being
overridden only by the President. Thus, the ARCA reflects a
congressional desire to limit the DCI's authority to protect
sources and methods, but only for "assassination records" as ARCA
defined it. An interpretive definition by the Board that would
sweep in records not covered by the Act, we believe, would exceed
the Board's limited rulemaking authority. Thus, the proposed
definition should be limited more clearly to those records
identified by Congress as “assassination records. To do this, we
believe

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
SUBJECT:
DCI Sources and Methods Authority w/Respect
to JFK Assassination Records
OGC-94-52916
DCI/OGC/RJEatinger: 76105 (19 Sept 94)
Original
1
-
-
Addressee
w/attach) (hand delivered)
OGC Registry (w/attack:)
1 - Lit File
1 - RBB (OGC/ILD)
1
1
1
-
-
- -
C/HRG (J. Pereira-404 Ames)
RJE - Soft File (w/attach)
RJE - Signer
1 - PDP
1 - KK -fyi
1 - PAS-fyi
:
1
I
1
1
'
1
i
}
|

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_38.jpeg ---
14-00000
In the letter to David, I would add at the end of the third
paragraph:
“Our Office of General Counsel provided some legal comments
on the scope of the definition that we've included in the
attached.
"
In the attachment under the comments to Section 1400.1:
After the first sentence, ending with “beyond the limits
established by the [ARCA]", I suggest adding the following
sentences:
"The Act authorized the Board to issue interpretive
regulations. Interpretive regulations, while entitled to great
deference, cannot be inconsistent with the congressional intent
to cover only certain specific activities. Rather, they should
stay within the clearly articulated definitions provided by
Congress. This is particularly important with respect to the
definition of “assassination records" since the ARCA has a
overriding effect on other statutory grants of power found
necessary in the interests of national security, such as the
National Security Act's direction that the Director of Central
Intelligence protect intelligence sources and methods from
unauthorized disclosure. The ARCA provides a statutory standard
for protecting or “postponing” intelligence sources and methods"
that applies only to “assassination records." The standard in
the ARCA restricts those sources and methods that can be
protected in assassination records. The Review Board is given
the ultimate authority to apply that standard, subject to being
overridden only by the President. Thus, the ARCA reflects a
congressional desire to limit the DCI's authority to protect
sources and methods, but only for “assassination records” as ARCA
defined it. An interpretive definition by the Board that would
sweep in records not covered by the Act, we believe, would exceed
the Board's limited rulemaking authority. Thus, the proposed
definition should be limited more clearly to those records
identified by Congress as “assassination records. To do this, we
believe

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_41.jpeg ---
14-00000
sensitive activities even when the documents contain
information that is only incidental to the assassination,
such as a passing reference to a name. There is a potential
risk that sensitive, non-relevant sources and methods would
be compromised.
We suggest that the Board consider adding wording to this
section that accommodates those instances when there is a
need to release ample information from a document to
disclose assassination-related material, while still
protecting obviously unrelated, sensitive information.
Board, of course, would continue to have access to the
entire record.
The
d. Section 1400.7 Additional guidance
"
1
Paragraph (d) states “any records identified with respect
to a particular person also includes any records for that
person by any other name, pseudonym, codeword, etc. This
appears to require that all records on any individuals who
are merely mentioned in an assassination record be made
available. We assume that the purpose is more specific
i.e., to assure that all files on an individual or activity
be made available regardless of the labels on the files.
suggest that the text be modified to reflect this.
We

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_40.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
2. Following are comments on specific sections of the
Assassination Records Review Board's interpretive
regulations, as published in the Federal Register, February
8, 1995.
a. Section 1400.1 Interpretation of Assassination Record
In paragraph (a) the reference to “activities and events
that may have led to the assassination--” seems overly
broad, and appears to go beyond the limits established in
the Assassination Records Collection Act. We believe that
it would be helpful to include an articuable standard in
this section. The present text would permit inconsistent
application of the regulations, which might encourage
massive and expensive, additional records searches that are
of doubtful value.
The following change is suggested in paragraph (a):
“activities and events that may reasonably be
considered to have led to the assassination--” (This would
be consistent with the Act.)
b. Section 1400.2 Interpretation of additional records
and information
Paragraph (a) raises a question as to the purpose and
definition of “additional records and information. The
meaning of the phrase "all documents used--during
declassification review of assassination records as well as
all other documents--"seems overly broad and unclear. As
presently worded, this section would appear to include any
document, book, index, record system, etc. regardless of
relevance to the assassination or investigations, including
for example, legal opinions. We assume that the purpose is
to enable the Board to request and review additional
records.
We suggest that the section be made more specific,
including a clearer statement of the intent. For example,
with respect to cryptonyms, codewords, guides, etc. a more
precise link to events related to the assassination or to a
timeframe could be helpful.
c. Section 1400.5 Requirement that assassination records
be released in their entirety
The introductory paragraph specifies that "no portions of
any assassination record shall be withheld--solely on
grounds of non-relevance. This appears to open the door
for access to entire documents that contain information on
"

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_42.jpeg ---
14-00000
.MAR 01 '95 12:51PM
P.2
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY
1 March 1995
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
John Pereira
Barry Harrelson
CSI/HRG
Kathryn I. Dyer
DI/IRO
Comments--ARRB Proposed Interpretive Regulations
1. I have reviewed the proposed interpretive regulations
drafted by the Assassination Records Review Board, particularly
the sections addressing the ARRB's interpretation of the scope of
certain provisions of the Assassination Records Collection Act.
While I have comments on a number of sections, there is one
section in particular which raises serious concerns--principally
1400.2 regarding additional information and records.
2. As presently worded, this section opens up significant
records which have nothing to do per se with the assassination,
and which are currently protected by various laws, including the
National Security Act of 1947, and, moreover, are exempt from
disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
For example, (d) Organizational charts of government agencies.
(e) Records necessary and sufficient to describe the
the Agency's:
(1) Records policies and schedules;
(2) Filing systems and organization; and
(3) Storage facilities and location.
Items (a) and (b) of this section ( 1400.2) also pose similar
problems in that (a) includes all documents used by agencies
during their declassification review... This includes all
materials including omnibus classification guides or other
materials (1.e. not merely those prepared for use in the JFK
review) which would identify sensitive material across the board.
Similarly, item (b) includes materials "created or used by
agencies in furtherance of their review...." This entire section
should at a minimum be restricted to items created by agencies
for use in the assassination reviews. For example, if the DO has
a master list of cryptonyms, some of which appear in JFK
documents, only the subset should be included. Generic
categories of information which stand alone on their own merits
should be omitted.
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_44.jpeg ---
14-00000
MAR 01 '95 12:53PM
P.4
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY
1400.8
4.
Implementing the ARCA
tion Records. (COAR)
-
Catalog of Assassina-
Sections (a) and (c) appear to be inconsistent.
As presently worded, former specifies all
records will be listed in COAR; latter section
implies not all records will be listed, i.e.,
requirement that in listing one must determine
that the record will more likely than not
enhance, enrich....
If any questions, please call 54644 (secure).
(K)
Kathryn I. byer
3
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_45.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
John F. Pereira @ DCI
Eldon 1. Hatch @DA @ DCI
02/21/95 02:15:20 PM
Comments re the JFK Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992
1. In general there is not much in the regulation to cause the DA undo concern except for Sec. 1400.2 Interpretation of
additional records and information; specifically (e), (1), (2), & (3). The schedules are classified in the agregate, filing systems and
organization structures are classified in toto, and the storage facility is an Agency Records Center at a classified location. I know this
may not be a lot of help, but I have little or no argument/comment concerning the other sections.
2. If you have any questions/comments, please call me on 30683 or note.
CC:
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_43.jpeg ---
14-00000
MAR 01 '95 12:52PM
P.3
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY
Recommend: Delete items (d) and (e). Subpart (a) should be
confined to documents created by agencies (vice used) during
their declassification review.
The inclusion of generic categories of information, i.e., those
created independent of the assassination investigation(s) and
review effort, appears to be a calculated effort to gain access
to significant areas of information that are protected by other
laws (i.e., circumvention of the FOIA.)
If provisions (d) and (e) are not deleted and a and b
not limited to materials created by or created solely for use in
the assassination review, an additional section should be added
that applies to section 1400.2 in its entirety. This should
state that information created independent of the assassination
review will be released unless protected by other laws, Executive
Orders, and/or regulations.
3. Other Comments:
1400.1 (a)
Recommend:
1400.6
Insert the word "reasonably" between "may have
[reasonably) led to the assassination..."
The mere allegation that foreign events or
international developments may have led to the
assassination at this point in time (after all
the investigations) should not bring records
not related to the assassination on their face
within the scope of this act. There should be
an objective standard, i.e., reasonable person
threshold. Otherwise agencies could be
subjected to massive records searches on
little more than whim. The JFK assassination is
the epitome of conspiracy theories.
threshold standard, the door would be opened to
additional searches (without merit), the
potential costs of which could be significant.
Originals and copies.
Without a
Recommend: (2) and (3) Add the word "available" after "the
earliest generation print (available]."
Otherwise no provision to cover situation when
earliest generation print can't be located.
2
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_47.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
1 March 1995
Mr. Periera
Gary Breneman
Comments on Proposed Rules, 36 CFR
Part 1400, Concerning JFK Records
Collection Act of 1992
1. You asked that I review subject proposed rules and
provide my thoughts and concerns. This is in response to
that request.
2. As a general statement, the proposed rules are not
well written and seem to try to cast the biggest net
possible. With reference to poor draftsmanship, note that
at Sec.1400.2, they introduce a term “additional information
and records, " and describe what the term includes. Compare
sections 1400.3 relating to "sources" and 1400.4 relating to
" (t)ypes of materials.” In the latter, they have reversed
the term and used “additional records and information.”
While the intent is fairly clear, it causes one to wonder
what they had in mind.
3. With reference to the big net approach, it is a
basic rule of statutory and regulatory drafting to not write
laws and regulations which cannot be enforced. In this
regard, I know of no authority in U.S. law, including the
JFK Act, which would give the Board jurisdiction over
records which “may be located at, or under the control
of,”…..”(f)oreign governments. See 1400.4 (b). I have a
similar concern with respect to “private” records. Cf. Sec.
1400.1 (a).
"
This
4. On the nonsensical side of the big net approach is
every book, magazine and newspaper article and which has
ever been written that may “report, analyze, or interpret"
the assassination. See 1400.1 (a). If read literally, the
Agency would have to give up all of its collections of
private books, etc. which fall within this definition.
is particularly true of those books we referred to here
within HRG for information and understanding as we conducted
the review. See 1400.2 (a) (a)ll documents used by
government offices and agencies during their
declassification review of assassination records...
- -
"

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_46.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
}
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D.C. 20505
22 February 1995
Executive Secretariat
Information Review Officer
John F. Pereira
Historical Review Group
Attn: Barry Harrelson
Barry,
Do not agree with "no portions of any
assassination records shall be withheld
from public disclosure solely on grounds
of non-relevance." See Section 1400.5.
Non-relevant material should not have to
be reviewed for declassification & release.
This could be a never-ending project.
Thanks for the opportunity to comment.
Eunice M. Evans
DCI/IRO

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
DRAFT
CHAPTER XIV - ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
Part 1400 - GUIDANCE FOR INTERPRETATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS
COLLECTION ACT OF 1992" (ARCA)
Sec.
1400.1 Scope of assassination record.
1400.2 Scope of additional records and information.
1400.3 Sources of assassination records and additional records and
information.
17

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_48.jpeg ---
14-00000
5.
With specific reference to the requirement of
1400.2 (a), the Agency should be concerned about its records
within the DO which tie crypts to true names of projects and
alias' and pseudos to the true names of individuals.
Because we regularly called the DO office responsible for
these matters for assistance in identifying the projects and
names behind the crypts and alias,' this subsection would
seem to place those document holdings within the reach of
the Board. This needs to be addressed.
5. Turning to 1400.7 (d), the Agency should be very
careful here. In HRG's review and release of documents, we
have often given out an alias but protected the true name.
In others, we have given out the true name but protected the
alias or pseudo. This section seems to vitiate that effort
and needs to be addressed.
6. I have several thoughts on the non-relevant issue
which would take several more paragraphs. Suffice it to
say, carried to its extreme, if the Board can in any way
make the case a document is an assassination record, then
they are entitled to access to it and may direct its
release.
7. I would be pleased to discuss any of these items
with you if you wish.
Gary M. Breneman
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_50.jpeg ---
14-00000
;
1400.2 (continued)
(b) & (c) ( ok ]
(d) & (e) [add wording to identify time period for
these records such as "at the time of the assassination and
investigations".]
1400.5 Requirement that assassination records be released in
their entirety.
An assassination record shall be disclosed in its
entirety except for portions specifically postponed..., and
no portions of any assassination records shall be withheld
from public disclosure solely on grounds of non-relevance.
(If this applies to an “individual” assassination record
then there is no problem. However, if it applies, as I
suspect, to files and groups of records then we have a major
problem of privacy and source protection with the OP and 201
files. It may be possible to “postpone” the 201 and OP
files under the Privacy exemption and National Security Act,
however, the FBI approach to amending the regulation to deal
with “incidental appearance of assassination material” seems
a better approach. Our proposed amendment should include
“files” as well as “records”.
1400.6 Originals and Copies
(a) (2) add "available” after “the earliest generation
print"
(b) in cases where a copy, as defined in paragraph (a)
of this section is authorized... the board may...require a
certified copy.
[In some cases our file copy or original is a previously
sanitized copy of the document; we may have to "certify”
theses copies as the “original” file copy.]
1400.7 Additional guidance
(d)...Any records identified with respect to a
particular person also includes any records for that person
by any other name, pseudonym, codeword, symbol, number or
cryptonym...
[This needs clarification. It the goal of this section is.
to ensure that all files on an individual/project are
provided regardless of how filed (under name, crypt, etc.)
then I do not see a problem. However, with out clarifying
language, this section could lead to the type of situation
described by Gloria. FBI also requested clarification.]

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_51.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
Issues:
Non-related (36,000+ pages) and OP (10,000 pages) material
in microfilm collection
The “segregated” records statement negates our claim that
material in the Microfilm is “non-related". We can point
out that the HSCA requested, but did not review a lot of
these records and that access was given to complete files
even thought the request dealt with specific events or
timeframes. However, given their objective of going
“beyond” previous investigations, I not sure this would have
any impact.
A different approach would be to deny or postpone personnel
type files including 201s that are not related to the
assassination (guidelines to be established in consultation
with the Board) as unwarranted invasion of privacy and/or
protection of sources. Approximately 25,000 pages of the
Non-related material are from 201 files; the remaining
10,000+ pages are from organization and project files.

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_52.jpeg ---
14-00000
10
march
To: C/HRG
Subject:
OGC's comments on proposed JFK regulations.
Bob's comments should be included in our response to
the Board, however, not as he has recommended. The language
and tone is very different and does not inserted well into
existing text; I think his comments will work better as a
separate paragraph or as an addendum.
Barry

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_49.jpeg ---
14-00000
2 March 1995
f
Assassination Record Definition: Comments
Background Section:
[the statement “search and disclosure of records...must go
beyond the records of previous commissions...” is based on a
similar statements on pages 19 & 21 of the Report to
accompany S. 3000]
Section 1400.1 - Interpretation of Assassination Record
(a) “An assassination record includes,...,all
records... that may have led to the assassination...”
[S.3006 states that the “Board should act on a reasonable
basis in requesting additional records. Recommend we insert
"reasonably" into statement after "have” (or change may to
reasonably could)]
(b) (2) "All records...or segregated by all
Federal...agencies in conjunction with any investigation...
[means all “microfilm” documents are assassination records,
and will have to be reviewed and accounted for even if we
are successful in “postponing” most of these records]
1400.2
Interpretation of additional records and
information.
(a) “All documents used by government offices and
agencies during their declassification review of
assassination records as well as all other documents,
indices, records, and other material that disclose
cryptonyms, code names, or other identification material in
assassination records.
[Section (a) is too inclusive; as written would include ANY
document, book, index, record system or other material
consulted or “used” during the review, regardless of
relevance to JFK assassination. In fact, most of the
material “used” in the review was used to determine if
information/names/etc. had been previously released and had
nothing to do with the assassination or investigations.
"
Also the part of the statement following "as well as" needs
clarification. Are they asking for all records that contain
information on individuals mentioned in assassination
records or are they asking for the records/indices/etc. that
were used to identify individuals mentioned by crypt or code.
name in assassination records.
( the amendment recommended by FBI covers CIA concerns;
ideally the word "used" should be changed to "created"]

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_53.jpeg ---
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
John F. Pereira
JFK Assassination Records Proposed Regulations
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
John F. Pereira @ DA
William H. McNair
DO/IRO
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
JFK Assassination Records Proposed Regulations
CSI-0319/95, subject as above, dtd 8 March 1995
10 March 1995
10 March 1995
1. The DO concurs in ref comments and would add the following:
A. Comment Par 2 re Section 1400.2 - para d and e(3) call for "Organizational
charts of government agencies" and "Records necessary and sufficient to describe and agency's
storage facilities and locations".
Organizational charts of detail are classified and release would have to be
balanced against DCI mandate to protect such details.
Description and location of agency's storage facilities are classified and
release of such information would have to be balanced against security concerns and DCI mandate
to protect such information.
B. Comment 4 re Section 1400.7 - Consideration should be given to protect
records and files of different time frame not related to JFK where the subject is but a passing
name or reference. To reveal full records could endanger national security without adding to
body of information relating to JFK.
remarks.
2. Believe these two comments should be considered for inclusion into official CIA.
CC:
CC:
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_56.jpeg ---
14-00000
Mr. David Marwell
Dear David,
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the
Assassination Records Review Board's proposed interpretive
regulations as published in the Federal Register, February
8, 1995. We recognize the value of providing guidance for
those who are responsible for implementing the Assassination
Records Collection Act.
Our general view is that the regulations are
"
comprehensive in identifying the range of records that would
potentially be relevant to the JFK assassination or the
scope of the investigations into the assassination.
In a few sections of the regulations the wording seems
somewhat overly broad or the meaning is not clear. Attached
for the Board's consideration are comments on these
sections. In some parts of the text we suggest possible
changes in wording for purposes of clarification.
We would be pleased to discuss these comments at the
Board's convenience. It is our intention to continue
cooperating fully with the Board and to make every effort to
release assassination records held by the Agency.
John F. Pereira
Historical Review Group, CIA
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_55.jpeg ---
14-00000
To: C/HRG
Subject:
1)
OGC's comments on proposed JFK regulations.
OGC submission
Bob's comments should be included in our response to
the Board, however, not as he has recommendeḍ. The language
and tone is very different and does not inserted well into
existing text; I think his comments will work better as a
separate paragraph or as an addendum.
2)
DI IRO
Kathy's comments on section 1400.2 are on target, but a
little strong. I don't think the board will buy changed
“used” to “created". Our proposed response, as written,
does question the scope but not directly. (note: The FBI
proposed wording, if accepted by the board, would
satisfactorily limit the scope of this section). She does
have a point in changing “intent” to “as presently worded”.
On section 1400.7, Kathy's reaction is the same as
Gloria's. I think our response adequately address the
concerns here, but could be strengthen without changing the
tone of the response. (Note OGC comments will also address
-
"scope” which clearly is Kathy's primary concern.
i
Barry

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_54.jpeg ---
14-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
John Pereira @ DCI
Barry Harrelson @ DCI
Kathryn 1. Dyer @ DI @ DCI
03/10/95 08:13:32 AM
Comments re Assassination Records Review Board's Interpretive
Regulations
1. I have reviewed the draft comments prepared for the Agency regarding the AARB's
interpretive regulations and believe some modifications are in order.
proposed
2. First and foremost, the comments regarding Section 1400.2 do not adequately address the concerns previously raised regarding the
unbridled inclusion of categories of records that have nothing to do with JFK's assassination, e.g., organization charts, records schedules,
filing systems, etc. This section should
› be limited to items created by agencies for use in the assassination review. Generic categories.
of information which stand alone on their merits should be included. This section is overly broad
and inclusive. (Please see the discussion in my 1 March memorandum.) Contrary to the proposed
comment that the intent of this section is “unclear", I think it is eminently clear, and that's the problem.
I think our concerns would be better served by raising in terms of scope rather than intent. Also
recommend against asking questions such as "Is it the intent...?" Heck, yes! Would suggest wording
along the lines--"As presently worded, this section would appear to include...."
3. The proposed comment on Section 1400.7 opens the door to all records on a person vice those
relevant to the assassination inquiries. Do we really want to set ourselves up for the obvious response to the question we are asking?
There are a number of different points here that need to be clarified, all dealing with scope. The board's legitimate concern that all
records on an individual records be addressed (regardless of how filed, e.g.under another name, pseudonym, etc.). And an equally
legitimate Agency concern that
1.) records on an individual when the records themselves are not relevant to the assassination inquiry,
(i.e. other records on the individual may be), or 2.) that all records on individuals who merely happen
to be mentioned in a document falling within the scope of the assassination inquiry (but the individuals themselves are not the subject of
investigation) should not be subsumed within the scope of these
regulations.
CC:
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_57.jpeg ---
14-00000
i
Following are CIA's comments on specific sections of the
Assassination Records Review Board's interpretive
regulations, as published in the Federal Register, February
8, 1995.
1. Section 1400.1 Interpretation of Assassination Record
In paragraph (a) the reference to “activities and events
that may have led to the assassination--” seems overly
broad, and appears to go beyond the limits established in
the Assassination Records Collection Act. We believe that
it would be helpful to include an articuable standard in
this section. The present text would permit inconsistent
application of the regulations, which might encourage
massive and expensive, additional records searches that are
of doubtful value.
The following change is suggested in paragraph (a):
“activities and events that may reasonably be
considered to have led to the assassination-·
be consistent with the Act.)
-
(This would '
2. Section 1400.2 Interpretation of additional records and
information
"
Paragraph (a) raises a question as to the purpose and
definition of "additional records and information. The
meaning of the phrase "all documents used--during
declassification review of assassination records as well as
all other documents--"seems unclear. Is it the intention to
include any document, book, index, record system, etc.
regardless of relevance to the assassination or
investigations, including for example, legal opinions? We
assume that the purpose is to enable the Board to request
and review additional records.
We suggest that the section be made more specific,
including a clearer statement of the intent. For example,
with respect to cryptonyms, codewords, guides, etc. a morẹ
precise link to events related to the assassination or to a
timeframe could be helpful.
3. Section 1400.5 Requirement that assassination records
be released in their entirety
The introductory paragraph specifies that "no portions
of any assassination record shall be withheld--solely on
grounds of non-relevance.” This appears to open the door
for access to entire documents that contain information on
sensitive activities even when the documents contain

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
1400.4 Types of materials included in scope of assassination record and
additional records and information.
1400.5 Requirement that assassination records be released in their entirety.
1400.6 Originals and copies.
1400.7 Additional guidance.
1400.8 Implementing the ARCA - Notice of Assassination Record Designation.
Authority: 44 U.S.C. 2107 note.
§ 1400.1
Scope of assassination record.
(a) An assassination record includes, but is not limited to, all records,
public and private, regardless of how labeled or identified, that document,
describe, report on, analyze, or interpret activities, persons, or events reasonably
related to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and investigations of or
inquiries into the assassination.
(b) An assassination record further includes, without limitation:
€
(1)
All records as defined in Sec. 3(2) of the ARCA;
(2)
All records collected by or segregated by all federal, state, and local
government agencies in conjunction with any investigation or analysis of or
inquiry into the assassination of President Kennedy (for example, any intra-
agency investigation or analysis of or inquiry into the assassination; any inter-
agency communication regarding the assassination; any request by the House
Select Committee on Assassinations to collect documents and other materials; or
18

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_58.jpeg ---
14-00000
information that is only incidental to the assassination,
such as a passing reference to a name. There is a potential
risk that sensitive, non-relevant sources and methods would
be compromised.
We suggest that the Board consider adding wording to this
section that accommodates those instances when there is a
need to release ample information from a document to
disclose assassination-related material, while still
protecting obviously unrelated, sensitive information.
Board, of course, would continue to have access to the
entire record.
The
4. Section 1400.7
Additional guidance
"
Paragraph (d) states “any records identified with
respect to a particular person also includes any records for
that person by any other name, pseudonym, codeword, etc.
This appears to require that all records on any individuals
who are merely mentioned in an assassination record be made
available. Is the objective really to assure that all files
on an individual or activity be made available regardless of
the labels on the files? If so, we suggest that the text be
modified to reflect this.

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_59.jpeg ---
14-00000
ALL
11.00 TA
202
ANAD
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesday, June 28, 1995 / Rules and Regulations 33345
(0) of this section shall be completed by
October 1, 1995.
PART 1926–SAFETY AND HEALTH
REGULATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION
5. The authority citation of subpart Z
of 29 CFR Part 1926 is revised to read
as follows.
Authority: Sections 6 and 8. Occupational
Safety and Health Act, 29 U S.C. 655. 657.
Secretary of Labor's Orders Nos. 12–71 (36
FR 87541. 8-76 (41 FR 25059). 9-83 (48 FR
35736) or 1-90 (55 FR 9003) as applicable.
and 29 CFR pan 1911
Section 1926 1101 also issued under 5
U.S C 553
Suction 1926.1102 not 1ssued under 29
US C. 655 or 29 CFR part 1911. also listied
under 5 U.S.C 593
Section 1926 1103 through 1926 1118 alsu
Issued under 29 U.S.C. 653
Section 1928.1126 also issued under 29
U.S C. 053.
Section 1926.1145 and 1476 1147 also
issued under 29 U.S C 653
Section 1926 1148 als issued under 29
US.C. 653.
6 Section 1926.1101 is amended by
revising paragraph (q) to read as follows:
§ 1926.1101 Asbestos.
(q) Dates. (1) This standard shall
become effective October 11, 1994.
(2) The provisions of 29 CFR 1926.58
remain in effect until the start-up dates
of the equivalent provisions of this
standard
(3) Start up dates. All obligations of
this standará commemta: on the effective
date except as follows
(1) Methods of compliance. The
engineering and work practice controls
required by paragraph (g) of this section
shall be implemented by October 1,
1995
(1) Respiratory protection.
Respiratory protection required by
paragraph (h) of this section shall be
provided by October 1, 1995.
(iii) Hygiene facilities and practices
for employees Hygience facilities and
practices required by paragraph (1) of
this section shall be provided by
October 1, 1995.
(iv) Communication of hazards
Identification, notification, labeling and
sign posting, and training required by
paragraph (k) of this section shall be
provided by October 1, 1995.
(v) Housekeeping Housekeeping
practices and controls required by
paragraph (1) of this section shall be
provided by October 1, 1995.
(vi) Medical surveillance required by
paragraph (in) of this section shall be
provided by October 1, 1995
(vn) The designation and training of
competent persons required by
paragraph (6) of this section shall be
completed by October 1, 1995.
(FR Doc. 95–15790 Filed 6-27-95, 8.45 am)
BILLING CODE 4610-28-14
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
34 CFR Part 685
RIN 1640-ACOS
William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan
Program
AGENCY: Department of Education.
action: Final regulations
SUMMARY: The Secretary amends the
regulations governing the William D.
Ford Federal Direct Loan Programi to
add the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) contrul number to cortain
sections of the regulations Those
sections contain information collection
requirements approved by OMB The
Secretary takes this action to inform the
public that these requirements have
been approved, and therefore affected
parties must comply with them.
EFFECTIVE DATE: Information collection
requirements in the final regulations are
effective on July 1, 1995.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Rachel Edelstein, Policy Development
Division, Office of Postsecondary
Education, US Department of
Education, 600 Independence Avenue,
SW. (Room 38153, ROH-3), Washington,
DC. 20202-5400. Telephone (202) 703-
9105 Individuals who wea
telecommunications device for the deaf
(TDD) may call the Federal Information
Relay Service (FIRS) at 1-800-877-8339
between 8 am and 6 pm Eastern time,
Monday through Friday
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Final
regulations for the William D Ford
Federal Direct Loan Program were
published on December 1, 1994 (59 FR
61664). Compliance with information
collection requirements in these
regulations was delayed until those
requirements were approved by OMB
under the Paperwork Reduction Act of
1980. OMB approved the information
collection requirements on December 7,
1994. Those requirements will therefore
become effective with the other
provisions of the regulations on July 1,
1995.
Waiver of Proposed Rulemaking
It is the practice of the Secretary to
offer interested parties the opportunity
to comment on proposed regulations
However, the publication of.OMB
control numbers is purely tochnical and
does not establish substantive policy.
Therefore, the Secretary has determined
under 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B), that public
comment on the regulations is
unnecessary and contrary to the public
interest.
List of Subjects in 34 CFR Part 685
Administrative practice and
procedure, Colleges and universities,
Education, Loan programs-education.·
Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Student aid. Vocational
education
Dated. June 23. 1995.
David A. Longenecker,
Assistant Secretary for Postsecondary
Education.
The Secretary amends Part 685 of
Title 34 of the Code of Federal
Regulations as follows:
PART 685-WILLIAM D. FORD
FEDERAL DIRECT LOAN PROGRAM
1. The authority citation for part 685
continues to read as follows:
Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1087a et seq, unless
otherwise noted.
2. Sections 685 204, 685.206, 685.209,
685.213.685.214, 685.215, 685.301,
685.302,685.303, 685.309, and 685.401
are amended by adding the OMB control
number following the section to read as
follows:
(Approved by the Office of Management and
Budget under control number 1840-0672)
(FR Due 95-15844 Filed 6-27-45 8 45 am)
BILLING CODE 4000-018
ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW
BOARD
36 CFR Chapter XIV
Guidance on Interpreting and
Implementing the President John F.
Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection Act of 1992
AGENCY: Assassination Records Review
Board.
ACTION: Final regulations.
SUMMARY: These final interpretive
regulations provide guidance on the
interpretation of certain terms included
in the President John F Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992 and on implementation of certain
of the statute's provisions The final
interpretive regulations make effective
the proposed interpretive regulations
previously published by the
Assassination Records Review Board
(Roview Board) The Review Board
revised the proposed interpretive
|

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_61.jpeg ---
14-00000
95
THU 11.51 FAX 202 724 045
AKKB
2004
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesdav. June 28, 1995 / Rulos and Regulations
lod to the assassination of President
Kounody
Response A number of commentators
put forward criticisins along these lines.
Some of these commentators suggested
that some form of a "reasonably related"
standard be tubstituted for the "may
have led to" language, while others
suggested alternative formulations (eg.
"that may shed light on the
assassination"). In adopting and
eventually applying a "reasonably
related" standard, the Review Board
does not seek to endorse or reject any
particular theory of the assassination of
President Kennedy, although such
theories may inform the Review Board's
search for records reasonably related to
the assassination and investigations into
it. The Review Board believes that
$1400.1(a), as now worded, advances
that effort and will promote a consistent
broad interpretation and
implementation of the JFK Act.
Comment: The proposed language of
§ 1400.1(a) is tuo broad and open-ended.
A more specific nexus to the
assassination of President Kennedy
should be required.
Response. As its text and legislative
history make clear, the JFK Act
contemplates that the Review Board
extend its search for relevant records
beyond what has been compiled or
roviewed by previous investigations. It
is inuvituble, therefore, that the Review
Board must exercise judgment in
determining whether such records
constitute “assassination records.” The
Review Board regarde its "reasonably
related" standard as sufficient to ensure
that agencies are not overburdened with
identifying and reviewing records that,
if added to the JFK Assassination
Records Collection, would not advance
the purposes of the JFK Act
Comment Section 1400 1 should
specifically include as assassination
records any records pertaining to
particularly identified individuals.
organizations, events, etc.
Response: The Review Board
determined that, in almost every case.
the types of records commentators
sought to add were already adequately
covered by § 1400.1 as proposed.
Accordingly, the Review Board declined
to include records or record groups at
the level of specificity urged by these
commentators because doing so might
limit the scope of the interpretive
regulations as applied mitially by other
agencies, or otherwise might prove
duplicative or confusing However, the
Keview Board welcomes and encourages
suggestions from the public as to
specific records or record groups that
may constitute assassination records.
and intends to pursue such leads,
including those provided in the written
comments to the proposed interpretive
regulations
Comment: Section 1400 2(a) is vague
and overly broad in describing the scope
of additional records and Information
Response The Review Board has
added language to clarify that the
purpose of requesting additional records
and information under § 1400.2(a) is to
identify, evaluate, or interpret
assassination records, including
assassination records that may not
initially have been identified as such by
an agency The Review Board also has
addod language to indicate that it
intends to implement this 60ction
through written requests signed by its
Executive Director. The Review Board
contemplates that, with regard to such
requests, its staff will work closely with
entities to which such requests are
addressed to implement the JFK Act
effectively and efficiently.
Cominent. The scope of additional
records and information should
specifically include records and
information that:
―describe agencies' methods of
searching for records:
-describe reclassification, transfer.
destruction, or other disposition of
records; or
—do not constitute assassination
records, but have the potential to
enhance, enrich, and broaden the
historical record of the assassination.
Response. To the extent that the
inclusion of records and information of
the types described would assist the
Review Board in meeting its
responsibilities under the JFK Act, the
Review Board has adopted the suggested
language
Comment. The scope of
"assassination records" under § 1400 1
and "additional records and
information" wider § 1400.2 should not
extend to state and local govemment or
to private records that are not in the
possession of the Federal government.
Response The Review Board
considered such comments carefully.
but concluded that the terms of the JFK
Act preclude the narrower reading of
the Review Board's responsibilities
urged by such comments. Section
1400.6 allows the Review Board, in its
discretion, to accept cupies in lieu of
originals. The Review Board believes
that this flexibility addresses the
concerns of some commentators about
the removal of original tururds already
housed, for example, in state or local
archives
Comment: Section 1400.3 should
include as sources of assassination
records and additional records and
33347
information individuals and
corporations that possess such material
even if not obtained from sources
identified in paragraphs (8) through (6)
thereof, and should specifically include
individuals and corporations that
contracted to provide goods or services
to the government.
Response: The Review Board has
added paragraph (f) to this section in
response to theco comments. The
Review Board has concluded that, in
view of paragraph (ſ), specifically
identifying govemment contractors or
other private persons would be
unnecessary and redundant.
Comment. NARA contended that.
§ 1400.4 should not include artifacts
among the types of materials included
in the term “record." Treating artifacts
as "records" would be contrary to
NARA's accustomed practice and the
of the term "records" in other
usage
areas of Federal records law and would
result in substantial practical
difficulties.
Response: The Review Board has
carofully considered NARA's objections
to the inclusion of artifacts as "records,"
but decided that this inclusion is
necessary to achieve the purposes of the
JFK Act. Tha Review Board notes that
artifacts that bocamo exhibits to the
proceedings of the Warren Coinnuission
have long been in the custody of NAKA,
and decided that those artifacts should
remain in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection. The Review Board further
believes that the unique issues of public
trust and credibility of
government
processes that prompted enactment of
the JFK Act require that artifacts be
included within the JFK Assassination
Records Collection. The strong support
that commenting members of the public
gave to this position reinforces this
conclusion. The Review Board included
in its proposed regulations, and retained
in § 1400.7(b)–(c) of the final
interpretive regulations, language
intended to address NARA's concerns
about potential copying requirements
and preservation issues unique to
artifacts.
Comment: Section 1400.5 should be
modified to allow agencies to withhold
from the JFK Assassination Records
Collection material that is not rulated to
the assassination of President Kennedy,
oven though it appears in a record that
contains other material that is related to
the assassination of President Kennedy.
Response: It remains the intent of this
section to make clear to agencies that, as
a rule, entire records, and not parts
thereof, are to become part of the JFK
Assassination Records Collection. The
purpose of requiring that records be
produced in their entiraty is to ensure

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_63.jpeg ---
14-00000
12.21.95 THU 11.53 FAX 202 721 0457
ARRB
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesday, June 28, 1995 / Rules and Regulations 33349
which access to such materials shall be
allowed.
Implementing the JFK Act-Notice of
Assassination Records Determination
The Review Board has replaced the
terin "Catalog of Assassination Records"
that appeared in the proposed.
interpretive regulations and redrafted
$1400.8 to clarify the Review Board's
intent. In the final interpretive
regulations, the Review Board
substitutes the term NARD for prior
references to a "catalog."
Paperwork Reduction Act Statement.
The regulation is not subject to the
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction
Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)
because it does to contain any
information collection requirements ·
within the meaning of 44 U.S.C..
3502(4).
Regulatory Flexibility Act Certification
As required by the Regulatory
Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA), 5 U.S.C.
601-612), the Board cortifies that this
rule, if adopted, will not have a
significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities and
that, therefore, a regulatory flexibility
analysis need not be prepared. 5 U.S.C.
605(b). The proposed rule would not
impose any obligations, including any
obligations on "small entities,” as set
forth in 5 USC 601(3) of the
Regulatory Flexibility Act, or within the
definition of "small business." as found
in 15 USC 632, or within the Small
Business Size Standards in regulations
issued by the Small Business
Administration and codified in 13 CFR
part 121.
Review by OMB
This regulation has been reviewed by
OMB under Executive Order 12866.
List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 1400
Administrative practice and
procedure, Archives and records
Accordingly, the review Board hereby
establishes a new chapter XIV in title 56
of the Code of Federal Regulations to
read as follows
CHAPTER XIV-ASSASSINATION
RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
PART 1400 GUIDANCE FOR .
INTERPRETATION AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY.
ASSASSINATION RECORDS
COLLECTION ACT OF 1992 (JFK ACT)
Soc.
1400.1 Scope of assussination record.
1400.Z Scope of additional records and
information.
1400.3 Sources of assassination records and
additional records and Information.
(including but not limited to those that
disclose cryptonyms, code names, or
other.identifiers that appear.in.
assassination records) that the
Assassination Records Review Board
(Review Board) has a masonable basis to
believe may constitute an assassination
record or would assist in the
identification, evaluation or
interpretation of an assassination.
record. The Review Board will identify
in writing those records and other
materials it intends to seek undur this
section
(b) All training manuals, instructional
1400.4 Types of materials included in scope materials, and guidelines created or
of assassination record and additional
records and information.
1400.5 Requirement that assassination.
records be released in their endrety..
1400.6 Originals and coples.
1400.7 Additional guidance.
1400.8 Implementing the JFK Act—Notice
of Assassination Record Designation
Authority. 44 U.S.C. 2107.
§ 1400.1
Scope of assassination record.?
(a) An assassination record includes,
but is not limited to, all records, public
and private, regardless of how labeled or
identified, that document, describe,
report on, analyze or interpret activities,
persons, or events reasonably related to
the assassination of President John F
Kennedy and investigations of or
inquiries into the assassination.
(b) An assassination record further
includes, without limitation:
(1) All records as defined in Section
3(2) of the JFK Alt,
(2) All records collected by or
segregated by all Federal, state, and
local government agencies in
conjunction with any investigation or
analysis of or inquiry into the
assassination of l'resident Kennedy (for
example, any intra-agency investigation
or analysis of or inquiry into the
assassination, any interagency
communication regarding the
assassination, any request by the House
Select Committee on Assassinations to
collect documents and other materials:
or any inter- or intra-agency collection
or segregation of documents and other
materials).
(3) Other records or groups of records
listed in the Notice of Assassination
Record Designation, as described in
§ 1400.8 of this chapter.
§ 1400.2 Scope of additional records and
Information
The turn additional records and
inforination mncludes
(8) All documents used by
government offices and agencies during
their declassification review of
assassination records as well as all other
documents, indices, and other material
used by the aguncius in furtheranco of
their roview of assassination records.
(c) All records, lists, and documents ·
describing the procedure by which thơ
agencies identified or soloctod
accossination records for reviow.
(d) Organizational charts of.
government agencies.
(e) Records necessary and sufficient to
describe the agency's:
(1) Records policies and schedules;
(2) Filing systems and organization;
(3) Storage facilities and locations:
(4) Indexing symbols, marks, codes,
instructions, guidelines, methodɛ, and
procedures;
(5) Search methods and procedures
used in the performance of the agencies'
duties under the JFK Act; and
(6) Reclassification to a higher level,
transfer, destruction, or other
information (e.g, theft) regarding the
status of assassination records.
(f) Any other record that does not fall
within the scope of assassination record
as described in § 1400 1, but which has
the potential to enhance, enrich, and
broaden the historical record of the
assassination.
§ 1400.3 Sources of assassination records
and additional recorda and information.
Assassination records and additional
records and information may be located
at, or under the control of, without
limitation:
(a) Agencies, offices, and untities of
the executing, legislative, and judicial
branches of the Federal Government;
(b) Agencies, offices, and entities of
the executive, legislative, and judicial
branches of state and local governments:
(c) Recurd repusitories and archives of
Federal, state, and local governments,
including presidential libraries;
(d) Record repusitories and archives
of universities, libraries, historical
societies, and other similar
organizations.
(e) Individuals who possess such
records by virtue of service with a
government agency, office, or entity:
(f) Persons, including individuals and
corporations, who have obtained such
006

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_7.jpeg ---
14-00000
DRAFT
any inter- or intra-agency collection or segregation of documents and other
materials);
(3) Other records or groups of records listed in the Notice of
Assassination Record Designation, as described in §1400.8 of this chapter.
§1400.2 Scope of additional records and information.
The term additional records and information includes:
(a) All documents used by government offices and agencies during their
declassification review of assassination records as well as all other documents,
indices, and other material (including but not limited to those that disclose
+
cryptonyms, code names, or other identifiers that appear in assassination
records) that the Assassination Records Review Board has a reasonable basis to
believe may constitute an assassination record or would assist in the
identification, evaluation or interpretation of an assassination record. The
Assassination Records Review Board will identify in writing those records and
other materials it intends to seek under this section.
(b)
All training manuals, instructional materials, arid guidelines created or
used by the agencies in furtherance of their review of assassination records.
(c)
All records, lists, and documents describing the procedure by which the
agencies identified or selected assassination records for review.
(d)
Organizational charts of government agencies.
(e) Records necessary and sufficient to describe the agency's:
ļ
19

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_60.jpeg ---
14-00000
Int 11.50 raa 202
0457
ANAD
33346
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesday, June 28, 1995 / Rules and Regulations
regulations after considering public
comment received in writing and
through testimony at public hearings
convened by the Review Board.
EFFECTIVE DATE: Those interpretativa
regulation6 010 offective June 28, 1995.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
↑ Jorumy Gunn, Acting General
Counsel, Assassination Records Review
Board, 600 E Street, N.W., 2nd Floor,
Washington, D.C. 20530, (202) 724–
0088, fax (202) 724–0457.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background and Statutory Authority
The President John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992, 44 U.S.C. 2107 (as amended) (JFK
Act), established the President John F.
Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection (JFK Assassination Records
Collection) at the National Archives and
Records Administration (NARA). In
octablishing a process for public
disclosure of all records relating to the
assassination, Congress cruated an
independent Federal agency, the
Assassination Records Review Board.
that consists of live citizens appointed
by the President and confirmed by the
Senate in 1994. Under the JFK Act, the
Raview Board is enipowered to decide
“whether a record constitutes an
assassination record " 44 U S.C
2107.7(i)(2)(A). Congress intended that
the Review Board "issue guidance to
assist in articulating the scope or
universe of assassination records.'
President John F. Kennedy
Assassitiation Records Collection Act of
1992. S. Rep. 102-328, 102d Cong, 2d
Søst. (1992) at 21. These final
interpretive regulations, a proposed
version of which were published at 60
FR 7506–7508 (Feb. 8, 1995), comply
with that mandate.
"
The Review Board's goal in issuing
this guidance is to implement
congressional intent that the JFK
Collection contain "the most
comprehensive disclosure of records
related to the assassination of President
Kennedy." S. Rep 102-328, supra at 18.
The Board is also mindful of Congress's
instruction that the Board apply a
"broad and encompassing" working
definition of “assassination record” in
order to achieve the goal of assembling
the fullost historical record on this
tragic event in American history and on
the investigations that were undertaken
in the assassination's aftermath. The
Board recognizes that many agencies
began to organize and review records
responsive to the JFK Act even before
the Board was appointed and began its
work. Nevertheless, the Board's aim is
that this guidance will aid in the
ultimate assembly and public disclosure
of the fullest possible historical record
on this tragedy and on subsequent
investigations and inquiries into it.
The final interpretive regulations are
intended to identify comprehensively
the range of records reasonably related
to the assassination of President
Kennedy and investigations undertaken
in its aftermath. The final interpretive
regulations are also intended to aid in
the consistent, effective, and efficient
implementation of the JFK Act and to
establish procedures for including
assassination records in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection
established by Congress and housed at
NARA's facility in College Park,
Maryland:
Notice and Comment Process
The Review Board sought public
comment on its proposed interpretive
regulations and set a thirty-day period.
which ended on March 10, 1995, for the
purpose of receiving written comments.
The Review Board also heard testimony
at public hearings on aspects of the
proposed interpretive regulations. In
addition, the Review Board sent copies
of the proposed interpretive regulations
to agencies known to have an interest in
and to be affected by the Review Board's
work, particularly those that either
created or now hold assassination
records, and to the appropriate oversight
committees in Congress. The Review
Board also sent notices of the proposed
interpretive regulations and request for
comments to many organizations and
individuals who have demonstrated an
interest in the release of materials under
the JFK Act or who have engaged in
research into the assassination of
President Kennedy
·
offices on December 14, 1994, froin
representatives of NARA on the
question of including artifacts in the
scope of the term "assassination
record." After publication of the
proposed interpretive regulations and
before expiration of the comment
period, the Review Board heard
testimony at a public hearing on March
7. 1995, from the FBI and from several
individuals and representatives of
private organizations on their views
regarding the text of the proposed
interpretive regulations. Copies of all
written comments received and
transcripts of public testimony on the
proposed interpretive regulations were
placed in the public reading room at the
Review Board's offices and made
available for inspection and copying by
the public upon roquest.
At a public meeting held on May 3.
1995, for which notice was timely
published in the Federal Register
pursuant to the provisions of the
Government in the Sunshine Act, the
Review Board considend a final dreft of
these interpretive regulations That
discussion draft incorporated many of
the comments received by the Review
Board on the proposed interpretive
regulations. The Review Board
unanimously voted to adopt the text of
the discussion draft as its final
interpretivə regulations. The approved
text is, with a few minor corrections that
do not change the substance, published
here.
Response to Comments
The Review Board found very helpful
the thoughtful and, in many cases, very
detailed cominents submitted on the
proposed interpretive regulations
Nearly all of the commentators
expressed support for what they
characterized as the proposed
interpretive regulations'
comprehensiveness and flexibility. All
comments submitted were carefully
studied and considered by the Review
Board Submitters made both
substantive and technical suggestions,
The Review Board received written
comments on the proposed interpretive
regulations from four Federal agencies.
three state and local government
entities, and twenty-one private
individuals and organizations with an
interest in the Review Board's work.
Federal agencies providing written
comments include the Federal Bureau of many of which were incorporated into
Investigation (FBI), the Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA), NARA, and
the Department of State State or local
government entities providing written
comments include the Dallas (fexas)
County Commissioner's Court, the
Dallas County Historical Foundation.
and the City of Dallas Records
Management Division of the Office of
the City Secretary
Prior to publication of the proposed
interpretive regulations, the Review
Board heard testimony at a public
hearing held at the Review Board's
the interpretive regulations as issued
here in final form. The summary below
includes the principal substantive
comments received and the Review
Board's responses thereto.
Comment. The proposed language of
§ 1400 1(a) is unduly restrictive because
the phrase "may have led to the
assassination" requires at least a
potential causal link to the
assassination Moreover, determining
whether there is a causal link would
require the Review Board to evaluate the
validity of competing accounts of what
4343
UUJ

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_64.jpeg ---
14-00000
✓ 007
2.21.95 THU 11.54 FAX 202 724 0457
33350
ARRB
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesday, June 28, 1995 / Kules and Regulations
records from sources identified in
paragraphs (a) through (a) of this
Gection.
(g) Persons, including individuals and
corporations, who have themsolves
created or have obtained such records
from sources other than those identified
in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this
section;
(h) Fuderal, state, and local courts
where such records are being held
under seal; or
_ (i) Foreign governments.
$1400.4 Types of materials included in
scope of assassination record and
additional records and Information.
The term record in assassination
record and additional records and
information includes, for purposes of
interpreting and implementing the JFK
Act:
(a) papors, maps, and other
documentary material;
(b) photographs;
(c) motion pictures;
(d) sound and video recordings;
(6) machine readable information in
ony form; and
(f) artifacts
§1440.5 Requirement that assassination
records be released in their antirety.
An assasination record shall be
released in its entirely except for
portions specifically postponed
pursuant to the grounds for
postponement of public disclosure of
records established in § 2107.6 of the
JFK Act, and no portion of any
assassination record shall be withheld
from public disclosure solely on
grounds of non-relevance unless, in the
Review Board's sole discretion, release
of part of a record is sufficient to
comply with the intent and purposes of
The JFK Act
$1400.6
Originals and copies.
(a) For purposes of determining
whether originals or copies of
assassination records will be made part
of the President John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection (JFK
Assassination Records Collection}
established under the JFK Act, the
following shall apply:
(1) In the case of papers, maps, and
other documentary materials, the
Review Board may determine that
record copies of governinent records.
either the signed original, original
production or a reproduction that has
been treated as the official record
maintained to chronicle government
functions or activities, may be placed in
the JFK Assassination Records
Collection;
1
(2) In the case of other papers, maps,
and other documentary materal, the
Review Board may determine that a true
and accurate copy of a record in lieu of
the original may be placed in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection;
(3) In the case of photographs, the
original negative, whenever available
(otherwise, the earliest generation print
that is a true and accurate copy), may be
placed in the JFK Assassination Rocords
Collection:
(4) In the case of niotion pictures, tho
camera original, whenever availablu
(otherwise, the earliest generation print
that is a true and accurate copy), may
bu
placed in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection;
(5) In the case of sound and viduo
recordings, the original recording,
whenever available (otherwise, the
earliest generation copy that is a true
and accurate copy), may be placed in
the JFK Assassination Records
Collection;
(6) In the case of machine-rondable
iriormation, a true and accurate copy of
the original (duplicating all information
contained in the original and in a format
that permits retrieval of the
information), may be placed in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection, and
(7) In the case of artifacts, the original
objects themselves may be placed in the
JFK Assassination Records Collection.
(b) To the extent records from foreign
governments are included in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection.
copies of the onginal records shall be
sufficient for inclusion in the collection.
(c) In cases where a copy, as defined
in paragraph (a) of this section, is
authorized by the Review Board to be
included in the JFK Assassination
Records Collection, the Review Board
may require that a copy be certified if,
in its discretion, it determines a
certification to be necessary to ensure
the integrity of the JFK Assassination
Records Collection. In cases where an
original, as defined in paragraph (0) of
this section, 16 required for inclusion in
the JFK Assassination Recurds
Collection, the Review Board may, at its
discretion, accept the best available
copy. In such cases that records
included in the JFK Assassination
Records Collection, whether originals or
copies, contain illegible portions, such
records shall have attached thereto a
certified transcription of the illegible
language to the extent practicable.
(d) For purposes of implementing the
JFK Act, the turm copy nivans a true and
accurate photocopy duplication by a
means appropriate to the medium of the
original record that preserves and
displays the integrity of the record and
the information contained in it.
(e) Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to suggest that additional
.
copies of any assassination records
contained in the JFK Assassination
Records Collection are not also
assassination records that, at the Review
Board's discretion, may also be placed
in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to prevent or to preclude
copies of any electronic assassination
records from being reformatted
electronically in order to conforın to
different hardward and/or software
requirements of audiovisual or machine
readable formats if such is the
professional judgment of the National
Archives and Records Administration.
$ 1400.7 Additional guidance.
(a) A government agency, office, or
entity includes, for purposes of
interpreting and implementing the JFK
Act, all current, past, and forner
departments, agencies, offices,
divisions, foreign offices, bureaus, and
deliberative bodies of any Federal, state,
or local government and includes all .
inter- or intra-agency working groups,
committees, und meetings that possess
or created records relating to the
a68assination of President John F.
Kennedy.
(b) The inclusion of artifacts in the
scope of the term assassination record is
understood to apply solely to the JFK
Assassination Records Collection and to
implement fully the torms of the JFK
Act and has no direct or indirect bearing
on the interpretation or implementation
of any other statute or regulation.
(c) Whenever artifacts are included in
the JFK Assassination Records
Collection, it shall be sufficient to
comply with the JFK Act if the public
is provided access to photographs.
drawings, or similar materials depicting
the artifacts. Additional display of or
examination by the public of artifacts in
the JFK Assassination Records
Collection shall occur under the terms
and conditions established by the
National Archives and Records
Administration to ensure their
preservation and protection for
posterity.
(d) The terms and, or, any, all, and the
plural and singular forms of nouns shall
be understood in their.broadest and
most inclusive conge and shall not be
understood to be terns of limitation.
(e) Unless the Review Board in its sole
discretion directs otherwise, records
that are identified with respect to a
particular person shall include all
records rulating to that person that use
or reflect the true name or any other
naine, púðudonym, codeword, symbol
number, cryptonynı, or alias used to
identify that person

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_62.jpeg ---
14-00000
95
11.32 FAX 202 121 0457
ANAD
i
33348 Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesday, June 28, 1995 / Rules and Regulations
that the context and integrity of the
records be preserved. Only in rare
instances will the Review Board assent
to withholding particular information
within an assassination record on the
ground that such information tɛ not
relevant to the assassination. Section
1400.5 has been modified to clarify that.
although the Review Board may allow
this practice in extraordinary
circunstances, this determination is
within the sole direction of the Review
Board.
Comment: The discussion of originals
and copies in § 1400.6 is, in various
respects, unclear and confusing.
Response: The Review Board made
extensive changes to this section to
address these concerns and to achieve
greater internal consistency. The Review
Board's intent in this section is to
express its strong preference for
including original records in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection, but
also its understanding that, for a variety
of reasons, there may be situations
where a copy instead of the original of
an assassination record may be more
appropriate for inclusion in the
Collection.
Comment: Section 1400.6 should be
clarified as to whether "record copies"
of Fodoral agency may be included in
the JFK Assassination Records
Collection.
Response: The Review Board has
modified § 1400.6(a)(1) to clarify that
the Review Board may determine that
record copies may be included in the
Collection.
Comment: The Catalog of
Assassination Records (COAR)
described in § 1400 8 should consist of.
or be replaced by, the database and
finding aids prepared by the Federal
agencies in possession of assassination
records.
Response This and other comments
received regarding the proposed
§ 1400.8 indicated sonie confusion as to
the intent and operation of the
mechanisin established in this section
For this reason, the Review Board
decided to replace the term "Catalog ul
Assassination Records" with the terin
**Notice of Assassination Record
Determination” (NARD), and to redraft
this section to clarify the Roviow
Board's intent to use the NARD
mechanism siniply to document the
Review Board's ongoing determinations
that, in addition to records explicitly
enumerated in the JFK Act as
assassination records (eg. records
reviewed by the HSCA) or identified by
Federal agencies in their own searches.
contain other records also are
assassination records to be included in
the JFK Assassination Records
Collection.
Section by Section Analysis
Scope of Assassination Record
As discussed above with regard to the
public comments, subparagraph (a) of
§ 1400.1 has boon modified to adopt a
"reasonably related" standard and the
term "Catalog of Assassination Records"
has been replaced with "Notice of
Assassination Record Determination" in
subparagraph (b)(3) The final
interpretive regulations also incorporate
suggested technical changes, including
edits for clarification and revision of
this section's title to make it more
precise.
Scope of Additional Records and
Information
The title of § 1400.2 was revised to
conform to the new title of § 1400.1.
Additional editing changes were made
for clarity. A new subpart (6) was added
to subparagraph (6) and a new
subparograph (f) was added after
consideration of cointients that noted
the potential exclusion of certain
categones from the scope of this section
in the proposed interpretive regulations.
The Review Board has added language
in the final interpretive regulations to
clarify that the purpose of this section
is to aid in identifying, evaluating or
interpreting assassination records,
including assassination records that
may not initially have been identified
by an agency. The Review Board also
has added language to suggest that it
intends to implement this section
through written requests signed by the
Review Board's Executive Director.
Sources of Assassination Records and
Additional Records and Information
A new subparagraph (g) was added to
§ 1400.3 after consideration of
comments noting the potential
exclusion of records created by
individuals or corporations or obtained
from sources other than those already
identified in the previous
subparagraphs
Types of Materials Included in Scope of
Assassination Record and Additional
Records and Information
No substantive change has been made
to § 1400.4 as it appeared in the
proposed interpretive regulations
Requirement That Assassination
Records be Released in Their Entirety
Language has been added to § 1400.5
to permit the Review Board, in its sole
discretion, to allow release of only part
of an assassination record where such
partial release is sufficient to comply
with the intent and purposes of the JFK
Act.
Originals and Copies.
Extensive changes were made to
§ 1400.6 for reasons of clarity and
internal consistency. The Review Board
also incorporated in the final
interpretive regulations language
clarifying that "record copies" of
Federal agency records may be included
in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection and addressing the important
issue of preservation requirements. In
this respect, the Review Board sought to
treat records in various media in a
means appropriate to the unique
characteristics of each medium.
Additional Guidance
In the light of comments received, the
Review Board extensively revised
§ 1400.7. Subparagraph (d), as it
appeared in the proposed interpretive
regulations, has been broken into three
subparagraphs—new subparagraphs (d),
(e), and (f) to avoid potential confusion
and to add clanty. The intent of these
subparagraphs is to make clear that all
files on an individual, event,
organization or activity are to be made
available to the Review Board regardless
of the labels on the files, where the
records may be found, or whether they
reflect the true name or identifier of the
individual, event organization, or
activity.
Subparagraphs (b) and (c) & 1400.7
were included in the proposed
interpretive regulations and retained in
the final interpretive regulations in
order to address concerns expressed by
NARA regarding the inclusion of
artifacts in the scope of the material
deemed "assassination records." By
including these subparagraphs, the
Review Board wishes to make it clear
that it believes the JFK Act establishes
unique standards as to the records to be
included in the JFK Assassination
Records Collection. By including
artifacts as a type of "assassination
record," the Review Board seeks to
fulfill its mandate from Congress to
assemble all materials reasonably
related to the assassination in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection. It is
not intended that the inclusion here of
artifacts for purposes of implementing
the JFK Act should be construed to
affect the implementation of other
records laws. Subparagraph (c) is
intended to ensure that all artifacts in
the collection are preserved for posterity
and that public access be provided to
those artifacts in a manner consistent
with their preservation. The Review
Board encourages NARA to set out in
writing the terms and conditions under
en

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_65.jpeg ---
14-00000
33
11.55 FAX 202 721 0457
ARKD
41008
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 124 / Wednesday, June 28, 1995 / Rules and Regulations
(f) Unless the Review Board in its sole
discretion directs otherwise, records
that are identified by the Review Board
with respect to a particular operation or
program shall include all records.
pertaining to that program by any other
name, pseudonym. codeword, symbol.
number, or cryptonym
§ 1400.8 Implementing the JFK Act—
Notice of Assassination Record
Designation.
(a) A Notice of Assassination Record
Designation (NARD) shall be the
mechanism for the Review Board to
announce publicly its determination
that a record or group of records meets
the definition of assassination records.
(b) Notice of all NARDs will be
published in the Federal Register
within 30 days of the decision to
designate such records as assassination
records.
(c) In determining to designate such
records as assassination records, the
Review Board inust determine that the
record or group of record will more
likely than not enhance, eurich, and
broaden the historical record of the
assassination.
Dated: June 22, 1995
David G. Maxwell,
Executive Director Assassination Records
Review Board.
[FR Doc 95-15819 Filed 6-27-95; 8 45 un]
BILLING CODE 6820-TO-M
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
National Park Service
36 CFR Part 7
36 CFI
RIN 1024-AC14
National Capital Region Parks; Special
Regulations; Correction
AGENCY: National Park Service, Interior.
ACTION: Correction to final regulations
SUMMARY: This document contains a
correction to the final regulations which
were published Friday, April 7. 1995
(60 FR 17639). The regulations limit the
sales on Federal park land to books,
newspapers, leaflets, pamphlets, buttons
and bumper stickers and set standards
for sites, stands and structures used in
such sales within National Capital
Region Parks.
EFFECTIVE DATE: May 8, 1995
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTAGI:
Sandra Alley, Associate Regional
Director, Public Affairs and Tourism.
National Capital Region, National Park
Service, 1100 Ohio Drive SW .
Washington, D.C. (202) 619–7223
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Need for Correction
As published, the final rule contains
one error which may prove to be
misleading and is in need of correction.
Correction of Publication
Accordingly, the publication on
Friday, April 7, 1995 (60) FR 17639) of
the final regulation, FR Doc. 95-8599.
for National Capital Region, is corrected
as follows.
In the FR Doc. 95-8599, appearing on
page 17649 in the issue of Friday, April
7. 1995, the words "the introductory
text of' need to be added after the word
"revising" that appears in the first
column, beginning on the ninth line,
which now reads "2. Section 7.96 is
amended by revising paragraph (k)(2) to
read as follows:" is corrected to read "2.
Section 7.96 is amended by revising the
introductory text of paragraph (kj(2) to
read as follows:"
Dated: June 22, 1943
Rick Gale,
Acung Chief, Hanger Activities Division
{FR Doc. 95–15741 Filed &–21–95, 8.45 amı)
BILLING CODE 4310-70 P
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY
40 CFR Parts 52 and 81
(A-1-FAL-6249–6]
Clean Air Act Promulgation of
Extension of Attainment Date for
Ozone Nonattainment Area; Maine
AGENCY: Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
ACTION: Final rule
SUMMARY: EPA is extending the
attainment date for the Hancock and
Waldo Counties, a marginal ozone
nonattainment area in Maine to
November 15, 1994. This extension is
hased in part on monitored air quality
readings for the national ambient air
quality standard for ozone during 1993.
This notice also updates tables in 40
CFR 52.1024 and 40 CFR 81.320
concerning attainment dates in the State
of Maine
EFFECTIVE Date: This extension becomes
effective July 28, 1995.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Richard P. Burkhart, Air, Pesticides and
Toucs Management Division. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency,
Region 1, JFK Federal Bldg., Boston, MA
02203. Phone, 617-565-3244
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: On Feb
22. 1995 (60 FR 9813). EPA published
33351
a nutice of proposed rulemaking (NPR)
for the State of Maine. The NPK
proposed extending the attainment
deadline for ozone for Hancock and
Waldo Counties, and asked for public
comment. No comments were received.
CAA Requirements and EPA Actions
Concerning Designation and
Classification
Section 107(d)(4) of the Clean Air Act
as amended in 1990 (CAA) required the
Støtes and EPA to designate areas as
attainment, nonattainment, or
unclassifiable for uzunu as well as other
pollutants for which national ambient
air quality standards (NAAQSI have
been set. Section 181(a)(1) (table 1)
required that ozone nonáttainment areas
be classified as marginal, moderate,
serious, severe, or extreine, depending
on their air quality.
In a series of Federal Register notices,
EPA completed this process by
designating and classifying all areas of
the country for ozone. See, eg, 56 FR
58694 (Nov. G. 1991); 57 FR 56762 (Nov.
30. 1992): 59 FR 18967 (April 21, 1994)
Areas designated nonattainment for
ozone are required to meet attamment
datus specified under the Act. For areɔs
classified marginal through extrenie, the
attainment dates range from November
15. 1993 through November 15, 2010. A
discussion of the attainment dates is
found in 57 FR 13498 (April 16, 1992)
(the General Pruamble).
The Hancock and Waldu Counties,
Mainu area was designated
nonattainment and classified marginal
for ozone pursuant to 56 FR 58694 (Nov.
b. 1991). By this classification, its
attainment date became November 15.
1993.
CAA Requirements and EPA Actions
Concerning Meeting the Attainment
Date
Section 181(b)(2)(A) requires the
Administrator, within six months of the
attainment date, to determine whether
ozone nonattainment areas attained the
NAAQS For ozone, EPA determines
attainment status on the basis of the
expected number of exceedances of the
NAAQS over the three-year period up
to, and including, the attainment date.
See General Preamble, 57 FR 13506 In
the case of ozone marginal
nonattainment areas, the three year
period is 1991–93. CAA section
181(b)(2)(A) further states that, for areas
classified as marginal, moderate, or
serious, if the Administrator determines
that the area did not attain the standard
by its attainment date, the area must be
reclassified upwards.
However, CAA section 181(a)(5)
provides an exemption from these bump

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
(1)
(2)
Records policies and schedules;
Filing systems and organization;
(3)
Storage facilities and locations;
DRAFT
(4) Indexing symbols, marks, codes, instructions, guidelines, methods and
procedures;
(5) Search methods and procedures used in the performance of the agencies'
duties under the ARCA; and
(6)
Reclassification to a higher level, transfer, destruction, or other
information (e.g., theft) regarding the status of assassination records.
(f)
Any other record that does not fall within the scope of assassination
record as described in §1400.1, but which has the potential to enhance, enrich,
and broaden the historical record of the assassination.
§1400.3
information.
Sources of assassination records and additional records and
Assassination records and additional records and information may be located at,
or under the control of, without limitation:
(a)
Agencies, offices, and entities of the executive, legislative, and judicial
branches of the federal government;
(b)
branches of state and local governments;
Agencies, offices, and entities of the executive, legislative, and judicial
20
i
1

--- Image 104-10333-10011_page_9.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
DRAFT
(c) Record repositories and archives of federal, state, and local governments,
including presidential libraries;
(d) Record repositories and archives of universities, libraries, historical
societies, and other similar organizations;
(e) Individuals who possess such records by virtue of service with a
government agency, office, or entity;
(f) Persons, including individuals and corporations, who have obtained such
records from sources identified in subparagraphs (a) through (e) of this section;
(g) Persons, including individuals or corporations, who have themselves
created or have obtained such records from sources other than those identified in
subparagraphs (a) through (e) of this section;
(h) Federal, state, and local courts where such records are being held under
seal; or
(i) Foreign governments.
$1400.4
Types of materials included in scope of assassination record and
additional records and information.
The term record in assassination record and additional records and information
includes, for purposes of interpreting and implementing the ARCA:
(a) papers, maps, and other documentary material;
(b) photographs;
(c) motion pictures;
!
i
21
1
I
i