

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_2.jpeg ---
14-00000
:
·
4. OTHER AGENTY PERSONNEL.
*
List other Agency personnel or former personne.F,
who on the basis of your own personal knowledge or
belief, had official or social contact with Subject.
Give brief information as to the period and nature of
such relationship for each.
See memo attached.
5. OTHER U. S. GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL
List all other U. S. Government personnel who, on
the basis of your own personal knowledge or belief, had
particularly close official or social contact with
Subject. Identify the Bureau, Department, Agency or
Office with which each such person was employed at the
time of the relationship and give brief information
concerning the period and nature of such relationship
for each.
See memo attached
6. OTHER PERSONS
List all other persons who irrespective of nation-
ality, sex, or employment are known or believed to have
had intimate or particularly close association with him
and brief information concerning the identity and occu-
pation of such persons, your knowledge of such persons,
and the period and nature of the relationship of such
person with Subject. Include also the names of all
American and foreign newspaper people with whom he is
known or believed to have had personal contact irre-
spective of the extent or closeness of their relation-
ship. Give names with brief information as to the period
and nature of such relationship for each.
I know of none.
Page 2 of 3
SECRET E
- 2 -

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_3.jpeg ---
14-00000
(
7. HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE CONNECTIONS
!
Can you provide any information of any kind
tending to establish that Subject may have been
sympathetic to hostile ideologies or had contact
with and was cooperating with a hostile intelligence
service. Yes or No
If yes, give
'full details.
no
Signed: Fee Scar
Dated:
10 July 1972
:
If you
*This is an Outline only of information desired.
either knew the Subject or have any information from other
sources on any of the points contained in the outline, a
separate memorandum is needed with each paragraph thereof
keyed to those in this outline. If you neither knew the
Subject nor have any information of the kind requested in
any section of the outline (and only in such instance)
negative entries may be entered under all sections, and the
outlined returned after signing and dating. The signed and
dated outline will thus serve as a memorandum for the files.
-3-
Page 3 of 3

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_1.jpeg ---
14-00000
104-10110-10306
1.
:
16:32
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SEGRETE
OUTLINE*
Subject: Philip Burnett Franklin Agee
1. NAME OF OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE
2. PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE OF SUBJECT
3.
Bustos Vidilla
Elsie 1. Scaletti
#56840
Were you ever personally acquainted with him?
If you were never personally
Yes or No
yes
acquainted with him have you acquired any information of
a personal nature concerning him through other persons?
Give details including dates,
Yes or No
by months and years as best you can recall, circumstances,
purpose and nature of any relationship vou may have had
with him and provide all data relating to his character
or personality, illustrating briefly with any-stories or
other information acquired as a result of your own
relationship with him or which might have been acquired
from others.
See attached memo
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
SUBJECT'S KNOWLEDGE OF YOU, PROJECTS, OR OPERATIONS IN
WHICH YOU PARTICIPATED
07/
On the basis of your personal association with
Subject, either official or social, or, on the basis of
what you know or believe him to be knowledgeable of,
outline the nature and extent of information you believe
he could provide an opposition intelligence service as to
(a) your identity as an intelligence officer or employee,
(b) your personal background and experience including
places of assignments, and (c) operations in which you
(Cryptonyms should be employed
participated in some way.
when known. The nature of the operations in any event
should be briefly but sufficiently described to lead to
their identification, with the dates or periods involved
and any comments or observations as to their success or
failure.)
See memo attached
SECRETISTNERITIVE
Page 1 of 3

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_4.jpeg ---
14-00000
SECRET/SENSITIVE
!
SUBJECT: Philip Burnett Franklin Agee
1
::
i
1. NAME OF OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE: Elsie I. Scaletti
1.
2.
PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE OF SUBJECT:
I knew Phil during the entire time he was in
Branch I at Headquarters, and during his tour in
Mexico. We came to Mexico PCS at the same time.
This means I knew him from 1965 until he resigned.
In Headquarters our relationship was limited to
business in the office, and that was not very
frequent. We sat in different rooms. He handled SB
matters. 1 did the routing of all Branch
correspondence which meant I decided what he was to
see--this was anything affecting Soviet/Satellite/
Chinese matters. My main areas of responsibility.
were in the support field. Even though we were both
processing out at the same time, we did not exchange
stories much. However, since I traveled as a
"Tourist" and was not therefore allowed to bring
anything into Mexico, Phil offered to have some of
my things packed with his household effects since
he said he owned hardly anything. One day my husband
and I took some boxes of things over to his apartment
before work. I do not remember the name of the
apartment development in Virginia, but it was the
garden type. His apartment was nice--fairly new
but sparsely furnished. He helped us unload the things
and take them upstairs. Then we parted. I seem to recal
he had some trouble with his car that morning and we
dropped him off at a repair shop on the way to the
office.
At this time, in Washington, Phil was very
pleasant, was nice to work with. He did not appear
to be pushy, even though he did everything he could
to get the Mexican assignment. At this time, despite
his family problems, he did not appear to let these
affect his work. At least from my position he seemed
to get his work done, not to procrastinate, not to
take a lot of time off. From the gossip I heard,
he was separated, and was anxious to get any assignme.it
overseas. When the possibility of this Olympic job
opened up in Mexico he grabbed it. As 1 recall, C/WH/1
was sympathetic toward him also, and was happy to be
able to help Phil at this particular time.
SECRET/SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_5.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
SECRET/SENSITIVE
C
In Mexico when Phil's houseirold effects arrived
he let me know%; and as I recall, ne brought them over
to my house and we unloaded them into our apartment.
We did not go and pick them up. In thanks, we
invited him over to supper one evening. (Willard C.
CURTIS had given permission for individual officers
to have Phil over to dinner if no outsiders were
present and prior permission was obtained.) I think
I got permission from the DCOS at that time. There
were only the three of us (Phil, my husband, and
myself--no maid, no other invited guests) There was
no discussion of office. My husband knew Phil was with
BKT RUST and was working on the Olympics in Mexico.
Conversation was light. During dinner, as I recall,
we talked about business in Mexico, and he mentioned
his father was in the dry cleaning business, and
he thought he might be interested in bringing into
Mexico some used dry cleaning equipment which is worth
nothing in the United States, and set up some dry
cleaning establishments in Mexico. The discussion
was merely in generalities--nothing specific as to
timetable or even if Phil were serious about this.
About a week later Phil brought his car over and
my husband helped him work on his car--adjusting it
to the altitude. This must have been around September
1967.
Shortly thereafter, when Laura B. UTSTINE was
in Mexico TDY (she worked in WH/1 and also knew Phil
at Headquarters), Phil had my husband, me, and UTSTINE
over to his apartment (on Insurgentes Sur just off the
Viaducto) for dinner. It was a huge apartment, sparsely
furnished. We had an enjoyable evening, very light
conversation. Talked mostly about Mexico. At this time
he showed us he had several bedrooms (forget how many)
and hopefully his sons would be able to visit him.
During his tour in Mexico I only saw Phil in the
Station occasionally--and then just in passing in the
halls. Once after I heard about Phil's having kidnaped
his boys, I thought I saw them (can't remember why I
thought they were his) in front of the Embassy with a
maid. I never saw Phil in the Embassy proper nor at
any Embassy functions (I was tourist and did not
circulate in the Embassy).
har
During his tour in Mexico, Phil remained pleasant
After Phil
but was certainly to find to talk to..
resigned I saw him once.
ri
After John PROBERT arrived
as COS, I saw Phil along the side of the Embassy.
SECRET/SENSITIVE

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_8.jpeg ---
14-00000
1
5.
SECRET/SENSITIVE C
Ex-LIADLIB ever met socially in Mexico or not.
I am quite certain their work paths never crossed.
LIADLIB is still in Mexico. He has had a difficult
time since his "resignation" getting a job,
keeping a job, and making ends meet. It probably
would be to BKTRUST's disadvantage now for
the two to meet. For this reason, and to assess
ex-LIADLIB-s present state of mind, Headquarters
sent someone to talk with LIADLIB-1 in the spring
of 1972. At that time he still seemed bitter
against BKTRUST.
Other than wishing to make special mention of
EX-LIADLIB-1, I know of no Agency personnel
other than those in WH/1 and the Mexico City Statio
whom he knew.
5. OTHER U.S. GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL
I know of none except the Olympic Attache in Mexico
under whom Agee worked from July 1967 until the
end of the Olympics.
Claui SScantec
10 July 1972

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_6.jpeg ---
14-00000
We just greeted each other. he said he heard PROBERT
was coming to Mexico and asked if he were here. He
wanted to call and say hello. I said yes. 1
immediately informed PROBERT, and suggested the
latter, read Phil's file at the Station as it was
my understanding there was some problem about his
resignation, but did not know all the details.
(This was true as personnel matters in the Station
were kept very close by the front office.) I do
not know if, when, or how many times PROBERT might
have met with Phil. At this time Phil looked neat
and well kept, as I recall.
3.
"IPV
SUBJECT'S KNOWLEDGE OF SCALETTI, PROJECTS, OR
OPERATIONS IN WHICH SCALETTI PARTICIPATED
a). Phil could definitely identify me as a long-
time BKT RUST employee
b).
Phil probably knew that Mexico was my first overseas
assignment, and possibly that I had a medical
hold before. He knew I had spent "many years"
in Branch 1, and was privy to almost everything
going on at the Mexico City Station.
He
knew I was assigned to Mexico under tourist
cover but worked inside the Embassy.
"
He knew
my husband was here as a professor at the Universit
of the Americas, and that he did not work for BKTRUS
c). In Headquarters Phil knew
I handled mostly, the
support projects plus such extras as LILINK and
02 (LAGLOBE (both NOⒸ) 24 LI LINK had closed down either
just as Phil came to the Branch, or just before.
However, Gary REYMANDER, formerly with LILINK
was assigned to the Branch then, and talked with
Phil about Mexico, and possibly about LI (LINK) "1
remember keeping the (LP) GLOBE material very close,
in my own safe, and I do not think Phil knew of
02 (LPGLOBE (LI REALM was then in Mexico under (LPGLOBE),
but may have learned of (LP) GLOBE program and LIREALM
through Ex-LIADLIB (see paragraph 4).
52
In Mexico City Phil knew I was in the Cuban section,
and privy to all operations being run against the
Cuban target. He did not know of operations in
particular except possibly LIARM-1 (now terminated)
who we hoped to use against the Cuban olympic
target. The Cuban Section tried to talk with Phil
many times about the Cuban delegations to the
Olympics, but as I recall, C/Cuba only succeeded in
SECRET/SENSITIVE
!

--- Image 104-10110-10306_page_7.jpeg ---
14.0000
.
SECT/SENSITIVE
GETTING Phil to come to our end of the hall
a couple of times. I was not in on the
discussions between C/Cuba (Raymond F. FRADYER)
and Phil, but I believe they were mainly held
to see who Phil had met who might be useful
against the Cuban target. I know we thought at
the time Phil was spending almost full time on his
overt activities and the SB target, and he gave
the Cuban target little attention./
-
5/100
.
OTHER AGENCY PERSONNEL
At Headquarters in WH/1 Phil shared his cubicle
with LIADLIB-1 who was pressing to get overseas
Ex-
as much as Phil, for different reasons.
LIADLIB-1 was a much more pusiy individual, less
experienced operationally (right out of the JOT
program) and out to benefit himself entirely--
much more so than Phil.24 LIADLIB-1 went out of channe
constantly, talking of (NOC cover) ideas (for himself),
and going right to the head of Training or JOT.
(can't remember which) and WOMACE on ideas and
suggestions, without necessarily going through the
Branch or Division. He had many business deals on
the side (one was as a landscaper in Virginia)
and had great prospects for business deals in
Mexico." He wangled a NOC) job in Mexico (replacing
LILINK) and was inserted in the (LAGLOBE program while
He was
he knew Phil (I think this was the 2 timing.)
also quite open in his bragging he had been hired
as a GS-13 (I think it was) and did not have to go
up tupuranks. This might have irritated Phil who
was still a 12. Ex-LIADLIB came to Mexico PCS about
Although I remember
the same time Phil and I came.
no close friendship between Ex-LIADLIB and Phil
on the desk, the fact they sat together, were
poth processing out for Mexico, would have meant
they had something in common. Also, LIADLIB was then
handling all the projects for CP and leftist
penetration operations for the Station and Base
(Monterrey). Phil would have more than casual
interest in some of these as some were being handled
in the field by Howard R. BENJAYA, an old friend of
Phil's from Ecuador.) I do not know that Phil and
il
SECRET/SENSITIVE
: