

--- Image 124-10179-10217_page_2.jpeg ---
SECRET
SECRET
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Samuel Adason Jaffe
105-28333
:
JFK
(1) (B)
i
Intelligence representative "had no right to tell you this."
[CIA has informed us that they did have contacts with Jaffe
while he was in Hong Kong and that he reported on Communist.
Chinese of interest to the Agency Is His file also records
that Jaffe told New York Agents in 1969 that a recently pub-
lished book on the Council of Foreign Relations described
him as having a subversive background. He was also described in
the book as being a member of the American League for Peace and
Democracy. Jaffe connected the appearance of this book with
his then recent recall fron Hong Kong by ABC.
ACTION:
That this memorandum be referred to the SENSTUDY
project in view of probable inquiries from SSCIO.
JEN
Tu
t i G
8/05105
TI.JE/N
SECRET
- 3
-

--- Image 124-10179-10217_page_1.jpeg ---
(1) (B)
124-10179-10217
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Samuel Adason Jaffe
105-28333
a
•
Soviet defector ["Sammy" has advised that Jaffe was
recruited by the KGB, in about 1962 while he was in Moscow,
through his relationship with a Soviet female. _ Soviet de-
fector "Shamrock" has confirmed that Jaffe was approached but
does not believe the approach was successful. C Jaffe reported
to the New York Office in 1963 what he interpreted as a recruit-
ment effort, and he was extensively reinterviewed in 1969
concerning his association with KGB officers in Moscow. There
is no information in Jaffe's file that he was ever reported on
by Col. Penkovskiy, as Jaffe reportedly has claimed. During
the interviews with Jaffe, he denied any overt acts helpful
to the KGB, although he admitted a continuing relationship with
several KGB officers. Both the New York and Washington Field
Offices came to the conclusion that Jaffe was a KGB agent while
in Moscow, but that there was doubt as to whether he continued
in that role after he was expelled.
Our relations with Jaffe were tempered by ["Sammy's"/
allegation, and Bureau Agents in contact with him were circum
spect in any dealings with him thereafter. Jaffe very likely
detected a change in the Agents' attitude which accounts for
his statement that he felt his relationship with them had
cooled off.
There is no evidence contained in Jaffe's file that
either New York or Washington Field or the Bureau has ever taken
any action which would affect Jaffe's livelihood. Following
his return from Hong Kong, Jaffe told his handling Agents that
he was experiencing difficulty in finding a job. He several
times mentioned his concern that is association with the FBI
might be the reason. On each occasion, he was assured that
the FBI had never divulged his confidential relationship and
would not do so any time in the future.U
Jaffe's file does disclose that during an interview
with Washington Field Agents in 1969, he said that he had
learned from a British Intelligence contact in Hong Kong that
his recall from that city was caused by his refusal to coop-
prate with CIA. He also related that he later mentioned this
to a CIA contact n Washington who responded that the British
-
SECRET
- 2
-I
CONTINUED
-
OVER
1