

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_10.jpeg ---
"
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
Also included in this response is Daniel M. Armstrong
III memorandum to L. Patrick Gray III, dated 9/8/72, classified
Confidential. This memorandum states that the responsibilities
of Legats have increased in recent years to include the
collection of political intelligence information for dissemination
to Dr. Kissinger and others. This is the HILEV Program. The
SSC has requested committee staff access to all indices and
control files pertaining to all programs operated by the
Intelligence Division from 1960 to present and it is expected
that HILEV will be included in the response to this request.
ACTION:
IFS
None. For information.
gra
sub
J
2
- 2 -
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 10
GUNEXENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_1.jpeg ---
File #:
62-116395
Serial Scope:
301 THRU 308
311 THRU 316
318 THRU 329
331, 332
334 THRU 336
337 THRU 339
Released under the John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992 (44 USC 2107 Note). Case#: NW 88326 Date: 03-18-2025
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_101.jpeg ---
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Senstudy 75
62-116395
ACTION:
telephone numbers at Atlanta (Code 404) as 294-2786 (office)
and 633-1079 (residence). Davis is scheduled to be on vacation
the week preceding the interview.
On the basis of the prior FBI release of Davis from
his employment agreement for purposes of the interview,
Intelligence Division will contact Davis in advance through
the Atlanta Office and arrange for Phillips to consult with
Davis immediately prior to the interview and be available for
consultation purposes at the time of the interview. This is
in accordance with the procedure we have been following in
connection with interviews of former Bureau personnel.
IBA
JAM
Eu
R70
mam
I
- 2 ·
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 101

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_102.jpeg ---
my
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Adid
Files &
Gen. av.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
H
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
C
UNITED STATES SENATE
SELECT COMMETTER ON
June 12, 1975
1-Mr. J. B. Adams
1-Mr. H. N. Bassett
2-Mr. J. A. Mintz
(1-Mr. J. B. Hotis)
1-Mr. W. R. Wannall
1-Mr. W. O. Cregar
INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC) 1-Mr. P. V. Daly
Enclosed for your information is the original of a
memorandum concerning an interview by Staff Members of captioned
Committee of Miss Helen W. Gandy, former Executive Assistant to
the Director of the FBI. A copy of this memorandum is also enclosed
for forwarding to Mr. James A. Wilderotter, Associate Counsel to
the President.
Enclosures - 2
62-116395
1 - 67- (Personnel File of Helen W. Gandy)
1 - 67- (Personnel File of John P. Mohr)
HM:jvl.
(12)
jol
TJM
He
3- ENCLOSURE
edm
mym
Wee
ALL INFORMATION CONTIN
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-11-2000 ET SAM/P
MDR-16
Off
62-116395-318
3 JUL 7 1975
REC-104
Dire or
MA
TELETYPE UNIT
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 102
PO 954-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_100.jpeg ---
I
t
TO
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSÅ GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
: Mr. W. R. Wannall
FROM: W. 0: Cregar
SUBJECT SENSTUDY 75
1
3
1 1
-
Mr. J. B. Adams
Mr. J. A. Mintz
(1
-
Mr. J. B. Hotis)
(1 - Mr. P. V. Daly)
DATE: 6/26/75
1
SOF
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. S. F. Phillips
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm. _
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Igent.
Anspection
wewe
Intell.
Laboratory
Legal Coun
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
-
-
On 1/2/15 Epstein ado, that it. priffoned windefinitely
737475
Legal Counsel to Mr. J. B. Adams memorandum 6/6/75
related contact with Legal Counsel Division by former SA Richard H.
Davis who had been contacted by Michael Epstein, Staff Member,
Senate Select Committee (SSC), who desired to interview Davis
in Atlanta, Georgia, concerning the former FBI investigations
of Martin Luther King, Jr., Stanley David Levison and the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Davis requested a
Bureau representative be made available for consultation
purposes during the interview and that Davis would contact
FBIHQ as soon as a date and place of interview had been determined.
Approval has already been granted by the Bureau for the release
of Davis from his employment agreement for purpose of the.
interview and you (Mr. Wannall) designated S. F. Phillips of
the Senstudy 75 Project to be the Bureau representative at the
interview.
Phillips took a telephone call this morning from
former SA Alan G. Sentinella (has already been interviewed and
testified before the SSC) who advised that he had been contacted
earlier this morning by Richard Davis. Davis told Sentinella
that Epstein had called him 6/25/75 and made an appointment to
interview Davis in Atlanta (exact site unknown) 2:00 p.m.,
Tuesday, 7/8/75. Davis had first tried to reach Charles Haynes,
a supervisor in the Atlanta Office, on 6/25/75 and, being unable
to do so, decided to pass the information to Sentinella as he
knew that Sentinella had had several contacts with FBIHQ in
relation to Sentinella's own testimony and Datu 1168 395-319
Sentinella to pass the information to FBIHQ.
62-116395
1 - 67-
SFP: 1hbihb
(9)
84 JUL 9 1975
REC-102
Davis gave h
3 JUL 8 1975
(Personnel File Former SA Richard H. Davis)
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED,
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFAND
DATE 10-11-200
BY.
MDR-16
CONTINUED
-
5
OVER FAL
UNSEL
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 100

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_103.jpeg ---
lu
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Evol.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
62-116395
1-Mr. Adams
1-Mr. Bassett
June 12, 1975
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY,
FORMER EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT TO
THE DIRECTOR OF THE FBI, BY SSC
STAFF MEMBERS
ALL INFORMATION CO
HEREI
DATE 10 y
MOR-16
2-Mr. Mintz
(1-Mr. Hotis)
1-Mr. Wannall
1-Mr. Cregar
1-Mr. Daly
The following information concerning the interview
of Miss Helen W. Gandy by members of the Staff of the SSC in
Washington, D. C., on May 15, 1975, was voluntarily furnished to
the FBI by Mias Gandy and by Mr. John P. Mohr, former Assistant
to the Director of the FBI, who was present during the interview at
the request of Miss Gandy.
Miss Gandy was interviewed by Staff Members Mark
Gitenstein and Michael Epstein from approximately 10:30 a. m. to
1:00 p. m., and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. Staff Member Martha
Talley was also present during the morning session of the interview.
Miss Gandy was not placed under oath, and she was not advised of
her rights or that she could be represented by personal counsel.
The questioning of Miss Gandy was directed primarily
toward obtaining information on procedures and personnel in the office
of former Director Hoover, on the floor plan of Mr. Hoover's office
suite, on the "Official and Confidential" (OC) files maintained in
Mr. Hoover's office, and on the destruction of Mr. Hoover's personal
correspondence by Miss Gandy after Mr. Hoover's death.
Miss Gandy said she was asked about the setup of
Mr. Hoover's office suite and that the questions showed a special
interest in the rear exit of the suite. She explained that this exit was
1 - 67- (Personnel File of Helen W. Gandy)
1 - 67- (Personnel File of John P. Mohr)
HM:jvl
(12)
jul
your
1
ENCLOSURE
62
11/2
10
SEE NOTE PAGE TEN
18
tis propered in response to your request and is not for dissemi-
side your Complice. His use to United to official proceedings by
MAIL ROOM Committee and the content may not be disclosed to unauthorized person-
rict with but the express approval of the FBI
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 103
11
PO 901-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_104.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
used by Mr. Hoover since it was most convenient to his private
office. Mr. Mohr stated that Mr. Gitenstein had attempted to draw
a chart of Mr. Hoover's office. Since that chart was a poor one,
Mr. Gitenstein asked Mr. Mohr to draw a rough chart of the office,
which Mr. Mohr did. Mr. Mohr recalls that he inadvertently omitted
the supply room from the chart; which room, he said, would have been
of little or no significance to the questioners since it contained only
supplies and no files. Mr. Mohr said concerning the back door to
Mr. Hoover's office, that interviewers were informed that persons
visiting Mr. Hoover were not brought through this back door, which
was for Mr. Hoover's use.
Miss Gandy was asked by Staff Members about the use
of the conference room, who attended the conferences, and the purpose
of the conferences. She said that Mr. Mohr explained that the Director
at these conferences discussed with FBI officials matters regarding
FBI administration and policy. She was also asked about the contents
of bookcases in the conference room which contained criminal code
volumes, ring binders of interesting cases, and miscellaneous books.
Miss Gandy was asked how many file cabinets were in
her office. She answered that she could not be positive but she believed
there were approximately ten or twelve cabinets of five drawers each.
These cabinets were secured with special locks and the key was kept
in a special locked key cabinet.
Miss Gandy was asked for the names of other employees
in Mr. Hoover's office and she provided the names of Miss Edna Holmes,
Mrs. Erma Metcalf, Miss Ruth McCord, Miss Nancy Ann Mooney and
Mr. Ronald E. Thompson.
Miss Gandy was asked if the Office Manager, Miss Holmes,
had files in her office and she answered, "no." She was asked if the Office
Manager's secretary, Miss McCord, had files in her office and she
answered that Miss McCord did have those files necessary to her super-
vision of office personnel and maintenance. She also explained the
function of the office receptionist.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 104
2 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_105.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
Miss Gandy was asked whether files were kept in the
Telephone Room and answered that the only files kept there were
background material necessary to the functioning of that office. She
was asked if a record was kept of telephone calls and visitors to the
Director. She replied that a daily log was maintained, and that these
logs were permanently filed in the main Bureau files.
Miss Gandy was asked if files were kept in the office
of the mail clerk, Miss Mooney. She answered "yes," and described
these files as mainly photograph files and scrapbooks.
Concerning the mail in Mr. Hoover's office, Mr. Mohr
said Mr. Gitenstein raised a question about "Expedite Processing” of
mail, to which Miss Gandy replied that the personal and confidential
mail for Mr. Hoover was handled by Miss Mooney and that she,
Miss Gandy, was not aware of just how this mail was handled. Mr. Mohr
said he explained to the questioners that this mail was received in the
Routing Unit of the Records and Communications Division and was
taken unopened to Miss Mooney, who opened it. The clerical employee
who brought the mail then logged it and stamped "Expedite Processing”
on the left-hand edge. Then, the clerical employee would take the log
back to the Routing Unit and when the mail was subsequently returned
to the Routing Unit for regular filing purposes, the item would be crossed
off the log. Mr. Mohr said Mr. Gitenstein wanted to know if the
"Expedite Processing" logs were maintained permanently and Mr. Mohr
answered that to his knowledge the logs were not kept after the items
on a particular log had been accounted for.
Mr. Mohr said that Miss Gandy was asked about
procedures regarding Mr. Hoover's commitments and she explained
that each morning the employees in the Telephone Room prepared a
"commitment card" of Mr. Hoover's commitments for the day and this
card was placed on Mr. Hoover's desk the first thing in the morning
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 105
- 3 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_106.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
for his information. Miss Gandy told the questioners that she received
a copy of the commitment card and that these cards were not retained
permanently. Mr. Mohr said that it was explained to the interviewers
that the Bureau had an instruction that items of a temporary nature
were to be destroyed after they were 90 days old and Miss Gandy
indicated to the interviewers that commitment cards were in this
category. Mr. Mohr said Miss Gandy was queried at length as to
just how Telephone Room employees got their information to make
up the commitment card and she explained that all employees in
Mr. Hoover's office made certain the Telephone Room employees were
promptly advised of all Mr. Hoover's commitments as they were made.
Further, concerning the Telephone Room, Mr. Mohr
said the interviewers were informed that calls for Mr. Hoover were
received in the Bureau switchboard and were then referred to the
Telephone Room in Mr. Hoover's office. The employees in the Tele-
phone Room connected Mr. Hoover with the calls. Mr. Mohr said
the interviewers asked whether the Telephone Room "screened"
Mr. Hoover's calls and that they were informed that the Telephone
Room did not "screen" them except for "nut" calls.
Miss Gandy said she informed interviewers, in response
to questions, that she did receive calls from persons wishing to speak
with Mr. Hoover and if he was in his office, the calls would be transferred
to his Telephone Room. She said Mr. Gitenstein made a remark about
a special telephone connection between Mr. Hoover and former Attorney
General Robert Kennedy and also remarked that Mr. Hoover and former
Attorney General John Mitchell also had a special telephone connection.
Miss Gandy said she corrected Mr. Gitenstein immediately by informing
him that no special telephone connection existed with any Attorney
General except Attorney General Kennedy.
Concerning the OC files maintained in Mr. Hoover's
office suite, Miss Gandy said she informed the interviewers that these
files were kept in a locked file cabinet and occupied about one and
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 106
- 4 ·
-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_108.jpeg ---
U. B. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
was invited to view the contents. Mr. Gray did glance through
drawer and obviously was satisfied that they contained personal
correspondence only and was also satisfied that the Bureau material
had been delivered to Mr. Felt.
Miss Gandy said one of the interviewers remarked that
there appeared to be more OC files than had been indicated and that a
larger number had been given to Attorney General Levi. She responded
that she would not know whether other files had been added to the group
after they had been delivered to Mr. Felt. Mr. Gitenstein, she said,
attempted to show her a pamphlet apparently containing testimony of
the Attorney General which described certain of the files in question.
Mr. Gitenstein asked her about specific cases in the OC files and she
told him that after three years she would not presume to try to
remember specifies. Mr. Gitenstein asked if there was a file containing
reports from the Washington Field Office. She told him that she
certainly would not remember such a file, if one existed.
Miss Gandy said there was much questioning about the
index cards which pertained to the OC files. She told the interviewers
that they were filed in one index file, that cards of a different color
were used and that this index file was locked.
Miss Gandy said she told the interviewers that strictly
personal correspondence of Mr. Hoover had been contained in the file
cabinets in her office and that from time to time during the past fifty
years, files which were no longer current were eliminated. Concerning
the destruction of Mr. Hoover's personal correspondence, she told
interviewers that on the day of Mr. Hoover's death, she advised
Mr. Tolson of Mr. Hoover's expressed instruction that his personal
correspondence be destroyed, that Mr. Hoover had begun a review of
these personal files sometime prior to his death and that some of them
had been already destroyed.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 108

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_107.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
one half or two file drawers. In answer to questions from the
interviewers, Miss Gandy said she informed them that on the day of
Mr. Hoover's death she spoke with Mr. Clyde Tolson, who was then
Acting Director of the FBI, and with Mr. Mohr and asked to whom
she should deliver the OC files and other Bureau material contained
in Mr. Hoover's office.
Mr. Tolson instructed that the OC files and all other
Bureau material such as interesting cases, monographs and manuals
be delivered to Mr. Mark Felt who then was Assistant Director-Deputy
Associate Director of the FBI. Miss Gandy said she was exhaustively
questioned by Mr. Epstein as to whether she called Mr. Tolson or he
called her and concerning Mr. Tolson's location at the time.
Miss Gandy said she told Mr. Epstein that at this late date she had
no idea who called whom but Mr. Epstein was assured that she and
Mr. Tolson communicated. She was also asked when Mr. Tolson
arrived at Mr. Hoover's house on the morning of Mr. Hoover's death.
She answered that Mr. Tolson arrived there soon after Mr. Hoover's
body was discovered. Miss Gandy said she asked the interviewers if
they desired more details of that morning and was told that they did not.
Miss Gandy said she told the interviewers that Mr. Tolson's
instructions were carried out. The OC files and the index cards
pertaining to them and the other Bureau material mentioned above were
placed in cartons and delivered to Mr. Felt. She was asked who
delivered the cartons to Mr. Felt's office and answered that she
believed that the delivery was handled by messengers or maintenance
personnel, but indicated she was not certain about this.
Miss Gandy said she told the interviewers that as soon
as Mr. L. Patrick Gray III was named to head the FBI, Mr. Felt
brought him to the Director's office to afford him an idea of the office
setup. After Mr. Gray indicated a very special interest in the files in
her office, the contents of these files were explained to him and he
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 107

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_109.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
Miss Gandy said she told the interviewers that up
until the time she left the Bureau, she continued to tear up the contents
of Mr. Hoover's personal correspondence files and deposited the
contents of the files in the "confidential trash" waste baskets.
Mr. Mohr said Mr. Epstein wanted to know if a log was maintained
of items placed in the confidential trash baskets for destruction.
Mr. Mohr informed Mr. Epstein that it would be ridiculous to think
that such a log could be maintained and Mr. Mohr advised him exactly
how confidential trash is destroyed in the Bureau. Mr. Mohr said he
informed Mr. Epstein of the Bureau files that were scattered over the
streets of Southwest Washington as a result of the Department of
Justice engaging in destruction of some of its files. Mr. Mohr said
this reference permitted an immediate termination of any questions
regarding the destruction of confidential trash.
Miss Gandy said she told interviewers she asked
Mr. Gray if, in order to vacate the office as soon as possible for his
convenience, she could have his approval to send to Mr. Hoover's
house the personal correspondence files which could not be disposed
of before the date of her retirement, so that she could finish the task
there. Mr. Gray did not hesitate to give her this permission. Mr. Felt,
who was present when she spoke with Mr. Gray in her office,
suggested that a locked room, on the fifth floor, with a key only she
would have, could be made available so the files could be disposed of
without moving. Miss Gandy said that would not be necessary and
Mr. Gray agreed. At this point Mr. Gitenstein asked Miss Gandy if
she thought she might not be the only one with a key. Miss Gandy asked
Mr. Gitenstein what he would have thought and she said Mr. Gitenstein
smiled and said he would have thought that.
Miss Gandy said that at a point in the interview when the
questioning appeared to be getting pretty far afield, she said to the
interviewers that if they were trying to learn whether the OC files
contained anything that would be used for political purposes, the answer
was no and that she had never found the need to lie about anything.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 109
-7-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_11.jpeg ---
NR 009 SF CUDE
9:10 PM NITEL 6/11/75 CJC
tro:
DIRECTOR (62-116395)
FROM: SAN FRANCISCO
(62-6887)
8
FEDERT
INVESTIGATION
COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
Timis
JUN 12 1975
TELETYPE
Assoc. Dir.
Dep.-A.D.-Adm..
Dep.-A.D.-Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell. W
Laboratory 26
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
trait Coun.
Delephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
ATTENTION: OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL AND INTD.
DSENSTUDY
ENSTUDY 75.
REBUTEL JUNE 9, 1975.
9. Charle
ON JUNE 11, 1975, FORMER SA DAVID E. TODD ADVISED OF THE
WAIVER OF EMPLOYEE SECRECY AGREEMENTS FOR THE PURPOSE OF A
STAFF INTERVIEW BY SSC WITH HIM. TODD REQUESTED AGENT BE AVAIL-
ABLE DURING INTERVIEW TO ASSIST HIM. TODD INDICATED HE WOULD
IMMEDIATELY ADVISE THIS OFFICE IF IN RECEIPT OF INFORMATION RE
DATE OF INTERVIEW.
COUN
SAC, SAN FRANCISCO, WILL CONTACT LEGAL COUNSEL DIVISION FOR
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION CONCERNING HIS INTERVIEW.
END
HULD PLS
ALL TINORMATION CONTAINED
TERDIT IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-17-2000 BY Sporm/pp
MDRY
EX-117
5
Hate
100/14
REC-26 62-116395-336
14 JUL 2 1975
56 JUL 17 1975
NW 88326 'Docid:32989611 Page 11

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_110.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
Mr. Mohr said that Miss Gandy, when she was
describing to the interviewers exactly how Mr. Hoover's personal
correspondence files were destroyed, said she reviewed each item
that she handled to make sure that it was not related to Bureau
official business. Mr. Mohr said Miss Gandy had previously
indicated that Mrs. Erma Metcalf had assisted her in destroying
these files, but Miss Gandy did not mention that Mrs. Metcalf made
the same type of review and Miss Gandy was not questioned regarding
whether Mrs. Metcalf made such a review as she went through the
files and helped destroy them.
Mr. Mohr said that during the interview a rather heated
conversation occurred over some of the questions which seemed to be
repetitious and irrelevant. Mr. Mohr said he told Mr. Gitenstein be
felt it was high time the questioners quit "beating around the bush”
and come to the point by asking Miss Gandy if she ever destroyed any
official and confidential files. Mr. Gitenstein replied that they had a
discrepancy concerning the OC files in that a reliable source had
reported that Mr. Mark Felt had five two-drawer cabinets marked
"O and C Files" is his office. Miss Gandy on the other hand told
Mr. Gitenstein in response to a question that she had turned over to
Mr. Felt after Mr. Hoover's death, as she recollected, one and one
half drawers and possibly two drawers of OC files. Mr. Mohr said
he explained to Mr. Gitenstein that Miss Gandy would have no way of
knowing what files Mr. Felt had in his office and if there was a
discrepancy, the person to resolve it was Mr. Felt, who Mr. Gitenstein
had said had been interviewed by him and had been cooperative.
Mr. Mohr said he had previously explained to
Mr. Gitenstein, in response to questions at the time Mr. Mohr was
interviewed by Staff Members, that at the time Mr. William C. Sullivan
had furnished the data of 17 White House telephone tapes to Mr. Mardian
in the Internal Security Division of the Department of Justice,
Mr. Hoover had instructed that any Assistant Director or Bureau
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 110

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_112.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
NOTE:
The original and one copy of this LHM is being furnished
to the Attorney General. The copy is to be forwarded by the Attorney
General to Mr. James A. Wilderotter, Associate Counsel to the
President. Information in this LHM was taken from notes supplied
by Mr. John P. Mohr and Miss Helen Gandy. These notes are attached
to the file copy of this LHM.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 112
-10-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_114.jpeg ---
J. B. ADAMS
DEPUTY ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR
TENT ON JERS
*
UZZAU
**
OFF
9. Are where any files persores.
in Hook's former
mins lisaby-
home aw
10. Re. Confidential trach = Epstein
wants to kum if log
kept - silly man.
was
11. he back door who used any
fils in hackway-nes.
=
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 114
h
-----

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_111.jpeg ---
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: INTERVIEW OF HELEN W. GANDY
official who had files in his office that he considered confidential
and relating to the Bureau's work would immediately transfer such
files to Mr. Felt and prepare a memorandum stating exactly what
was transferred to Mr. Felt. Mr. Mohr said he told Mr. Gitenstein
he, Mr. Mohr, had no idea how many files Mr. Felt collected as a
result of Mr. Hoover's instruction. Mr. Mohr said it was interesting
to note that he was not asked at any time whether he had turned over
any files to Mr. Felt in connection with Mr. Hoover's instructions.
Mr. Mohr stated that Miss Gandy was asked during
her interview whether there were any files of Mr. Hoover's personal
correspondence in Mr. Hoover's former home at the present time and
Miss Gandy replied,”no. "
Mr. Mohr said Mr. Epstein questioned Miss Gandy at
length concerning her title as "Executive Assistant." Mr. Epstein
wanted to know when she acquired this title and she said she could not
recall. Mr. Epstein asked whether anyone else at the FBI had occupied
this position and Miss Gandy explained that she was the only employee
with the title of Executive Assistant who had served under Mr. Hoover
during his tenure in office. Mr. Epstein seemed to pay a great deal
of attention to the title Executive Assistant and Mr. Mohr attempted to
explain to him that the title was a Civil Service Commission (CSC) title
and that Miss Gandy's position was set up under the Classification Act
administered by the CSC. Mr. Mohr said he was not sure what was
behind Mr. Epstein's lengthy questioning about this title, but Mr. Mohr
got the impression that Mr. Epstein may have been trying to find out
if Miss Gandy acted for Mr. Hoover on her own initiative. Mr. Mohr
said this was just a guess on his part.
Miss Gandy said that at one point during the interview,
the questions concerned Mr. Hoover's being advised of Bureau matters.
She said the interviewers were told by her and by Mr. Mohr that
Mr. Hoover was never out of touch with the Burean, day or night,
whether be was in town or out of town.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 111
9.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_113.jpeg ---
I
1.6.
. ADAMS
DEPUTY ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR
1a = drew a chart of Mr. Hoffice identiped
people and it in lage
how handled?
1. Expedite processing
=
2. Zecutive Assistant = ?
3. J.C. Files were
mainland in big conf
Rm in "black" folders.
4. Destruction of Por Con
diant
mention
supply
Min.
oversight.
=
Per con files
nr files = misses. said
she reviewed each item to make
..
sure none related to Bu of.
of
Bus.
5. Miss bandy explained a log was kept.
all visitors seen by Mr. H.= also
was kept of aughone calls taken
by my. Ht.
log
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 16-11-2000 BY SPRAUM/RP
6. Aished re. Mr. His Commitments = who
prefere
+
were they retained: res.
7. All calls to Mr. H. came these
"the Directors phime km.
8. Re. a.c. tile = reliable source told them
5-2 draves cabinets marked
Felt had 5-2
ac files. discrepancy.
• discrepancy? why not
ask Feet. also re, Files are has t
NW 88326 62989611 Page 113

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_115.jpeg ---
Mob.
2 didn't mention The questions
se expose processing voc
inqu
the clove questioning the
Er assistant title. You explained
those
items
• Hope 2 remembered enough
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS ÜNSLACSINTED
DATE 10
3000 BY
SPALM/BR.
MDRY6
+
0
E
F
415
F
433
÷
D
=
L
NM 88226. Norld:32989611.Page 115
"
t
k
L
P

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_119.jpeg ---
4.
The telephone room. Here, again, close questioning re
files kept in this office. Assurance was given that
the only files kept here were background material necessary
to the functioning of the office. Questions were asked
if records were made of telephone calls and visitors to
the Director. Information was given that a daily log was
maintained, and it was described. Question was asked re
where and how long the logs were maintained. Answer was
that they were permanently filed in the main Bureau files.
Mail clerk's (Miss Mooney) office. Were there files here?
Answer was yes, mainly photograph files and also the
scrap books.
The names of Miss Holmes Mrs. Metcalf Miss McCord
Ron Thompson and Miss Mooney were requested and given.
At one point during the sessions in being questioned re the
Director's being advised of Bureau matters the questioners were
told by both Mr. Mohr and me that Mr. Hoover never was out of
touch with the Bureau, day or night, whether in town or out of
town.
Also, I said at a point when the questioning appeared to be
getting pretty far afield, if what they were trying to learn
✓ was whether there was contained in the o.c. files anything that
would be used for political purpose, the answer was NO that
I had never found the need to lie about anything.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 119

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_12.jpeg ---
TO
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
: Mr. J. B. Adams
FROM : Legal Couns
G
0
Counselin
SUBJECT: SENSTUDY 75.
*
DATE:
June 2, 1975
12
30
6/24/75
edm
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Filos & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Dir
On 5-30-75, John Elliff, Task Force Director of
captioned Committee's Task Force on Domestic Intelligence
Activities, and SA Paul V. Daly of this Division discussed
the possibility of Elliff and members of his task force,
conducting the inquiry into the FBI, having lunch with the
Director. Elliff stated he felt that such an arrangement
would be very beneficial and indicated that he and four or
five staff members would attend such a luncheon.
Schdale
June
It would appear that such an arrangement might be
beneficial and consideration should be given to arranging a
luncheon if the Director's schedule permits.
RECOMMENDATION:
That the luncheon be arranged in line with the above
at a time convenient to the Director.
1
-
Mr. Wannall
1 Mr. Mintz
-
1 Mr. W.O. Cregar
dddddd
1
-
1 Mr. Hotis
-
1 Mr. Daly
-
-
Mrs. Metcalf
PVD:eeku
(8)
At
pus
Ok
gra OKY PL
JBH/PVD
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASS
BY
DATE 10-12-2000 EXSPLAUD/B4P
51 JUL 15975
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 12
MDR-16
EX-117
REC-2
62-116395-335
7 JUN 25 1975
LEGA
LEWY @ofam.co
!
I

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_116.jpeg ---
May 15, 1975
MOT COLTAIN
TOLASSIFII)
ALL INFORMATION CONTINUO
HONAN IS UNCLASSTE
DALE 10-11-2000 BY
MDR-16
Va
Present at questioning
Mark Gitenstein
Mike Epstein
Martha Talley (morning session only)
John P. Mohr
Helen W. Gandy
The first questions concerned the set-up of the Director's
office suite. Special interest was indicated in the rear
exit of the suite and it was explained that this exit was
used by the Director as it was most convenient to his private
office. Mr. Mohr also mentioned the kitchen and lavatory,
as the questioners appeared to be completely unfamiliar with
the arrangement of the suite.
Nextr.
-
the conference room was described and in answer to
questions the use of the conference room was explained also,
information was given re the contents of the bookcases in this
room, ie, miscellaneous books; the Criminal Code volumns;
the ring binders of Interesting Cases.
Numerous questions were asked:
L
1
How often did the Director call conferences of
the officials of the Bureau
what were the purposes of these conferences
just who attended them -
were they called by the Director and was this
at set and regular intervals.
Mr. Mohr explained that the Director from time to time
as he reviewed matters of policy and like matters that
came to his attention, made notes which he discussed with
the officials, giving them his ideas on these matters and
in turn listening to their views. These sessions considered
DIEE all matters re Bureau administration and policy.
Three; The physical set-up of the office of the Executive
Assistant:
Lav
I was asked re the number of file cases in my office
I answered that I could not, at this date, be positive,
but I believe there were approximately ten or twelve five-
drawer cabinets
What were the contents of these cabinets and where
were the so-called o.c. files - were the o.c. files
contained in combination locked cabinets
I answered that all of the cabinets in my office were
secured with special locks and key, and that the key was
kept in a special locked key-cabinet in this office.
Questions-did I receive calls for the Director from
his friends and others, and did I transfer them to
his desk; did I make memoranda of such calls; did I
keep a diary; (Mr. Gitenstein made a remark re a
special telephone connection between the Director
and "Bobby", apparently thought better of it, and
remarked that Mr. Mitchell had such a connection)
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 116
[CLOSE]
62-116385-319

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_120.jpeg ---
RE:
5/23/75
MISS GANDY'S QUESTIONING BY SENATE
SELECT COMMITTEE INVESTIGATING
FEDERAL AGENCIES WITH INTELLIGENCE-
GATHERING FUNCTIONS
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN O
HERDIN IS UNCLASS,
HAM 10-11-200
SPZ ACM
L
91-8041
Miss Gandy and I appeared before the staff of the
subcommittee for questioning on May 15, 1975, our appointment
being set for 10:30 a. m. The group consisting of Messrs. Gitenstein,
Epstein and M. S. Talley immediately proceeded to the former
Carroll Arms Apartment building which is now used as an office
building by the U.S. Senate. We were taken to the sixth floor where
we entered an empty office which contained telephone equipment,
some chairs, and a desk.
Mr. Gitenstein had apparently drawn up a list of
questions he wished to discuss with Miss Gandy and he referred to
this list throughout the questioning period.
There is attached a rough draft memorandum
consisting of four pages and dated May 15, 1975, which was prepared by
Miss Gandy concerning her recollection of what transpired during
the interview. The interview, incidentally, lasted until
1 p. m. when a one-hour break was taken for lunch. The session
reconvened at 2 p. m. and was terminated at 3 p.m.
I am setting forth hereafter in numbered paragraphs
items which I recollect transpired during the interview which
should be helpful in embellishing Miss Gandy's me morandum.
(1) During the early part of the questioning, Mr. Gitenstein
attempted to draw a chart of Mr. Hoover's office in the Department of
Justice building. He said he had previously visited Mr. Kelley's suite in
the Justice Building. His effort at charting the office was poor at best
and he requested my assistance. A rough chart was drawn showing
Mr. Hoover's personal office on one end and Miss Mooney's office on
the other end. In making up the chart I inadvertently left out the supply
room which, of course, would have been of little or no significance to
the questioners since this room contained supplies only and no files.
62-114 395-318
ANGITOURS
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 120
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_118.jpeg ---
'
3.
:)
Four:
I
In connection with the above authorizations it was
explained that as soon as Mr. Gray was named as the
new Director Mr. Felt brought him to the Director's
office to afford him an idea of the office set-up;
that Mr. Gray indicated a very special interest in
the files in my office; that their contents were ex-
plained to him and that he was invited to view the
contents. He did glance thru a drawer and obviously
was satisfied that they contained personal correspondence
anly, and was also satisfied that the Bureau material had
been delivered to Mr. Felt. One of the questioners
remarked that there appeared to be more o.c. files than
had been indicated; that a larger number had been given
to Attorney General Levi..I remarked that I would not
know whether other files had been added to the group
after they had been delivered to Mr. Felt. Mr. Gitenstein
then attempted to show me a pamphlet indicating what
appeared to be testimony of the Attorney General describing
certain of the files in question and asked questions re
specific cases which were contained in the ō.c. files. I
told him I would not presume, after three years, to try
to remember specifics. He asked if there were a file
containing reports from the Washington Field Office. I
told him certainly I would not remember such a file, if
one existed.
"I
To questions regarding the destruction of personal
correspondence files I explained that up until the
time I left the Bureau I continued to tear up and de-
posit the contents of these files in the "confidential
trash" waste baskets; (Mr. Mohr here explained this
method of disposal.) that I had asked Mr. Gray if, in
order to vacate the office as soon as possible for his
convenience, I could have his approval to send to
Mr. Hoover's house files which could not be disposed of
before my date of retirement and finish the task there.
He did not hesitate to give me this permission. (Mr. Felt,
who was present when I spoke with Mr. Gray (in my office)
suggested that a locked room on the fifth floor, with a
key only I would have, could be made available so the files
would be disposed on without moving.
.I said that
would not be necessary and Mr. Gray agreed. At this point
Mr. Gitenstein asked me if I thought I might not be the
only one with a key. I asked him what he would have thought
and he smiled and said he would have thought that.
Questions were asked, in further connection with the
set-up of the office and personnel.
The office of the Office Manager (Miss Holmes). Did she
have file cases in her office. The answer was "no".
The office of the secretary to the Office Manager (Miss McCord)
Were there files in her office and if so what did they contain.
The answer was "yes" and the contents were material necessary
for use by the Office Manager in connection with her super-
vision of the office personnel, andXma±n±■İn±ngxibe and
maintainance.
The reception room. The function of the receptionist was
explained.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 118

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_122.jpeg ---
L
L
*
(5) I should mention that Miss Gandy in describing exactly
how Mr. Hoover's personal correspondence files were destroyed said
she reviewed each item that she handled to make sure that it was not
related to Bureau official business. She had previously indicated
that Mrs. Erma Metcalf had assisted her in destroying these files
but she did not mention that Mrs. Metcalf endulged in the same type of review and
Miss Gandy was not questioned whether Mrs. Metcalf had made such a
review as she went through the files and helped destroy them.
(6) Both Mr. Gitenstein and Mr. Epstein queried Miss Gandy
at length about the log kept in the Telephone Room of all calls taken by
Mr. Hoover. They also queried her at length concerning a log that was
kept in the Telephone Room of all visitors to FBI Headquarters who were
seen by Mr. Hoover. Miss Gandy explained that these logs, to her knowledge,
were currently retained in the regular Bureau file room.
(7) Miss Gandy was asked regarding Mr. Hoover's commitments
and she explained that each morning the employees in the Telephone Room
prepared a commitment card of Mr. Hoover's commitments for the day
and this card was placed on Mr. Hoover's desk the first thing in the
morning for his information. Miss Gandy reported that she received a
copy of this commitment card. She was asked whether these commitment
cards were retained permanently and she replied in the negative. Somewhere
along the line it was explained to the interviewers that the Bureau had an
instruction that all items of a temporary nature, such as ticklers and the
⚫ like were to be destroyed after they were 90 days old. Miss Gandy
indicated these commitment cards would have come under this category
for destruction. Miss Gandy was queried at length as to just how the
Telephone Room employees got their information to make up the commitment
card and she explained that all employees in Mr. Hoover's office made
certain the Telephone Room employees were promptly advised of all of
Mr. Hoover's commitments as they were made.
(8) In explaining the telephone set-up in the Department of Justice
building as far as it related to the FBI, the Staff members were informed
that calls for Mr. Hoover were received in the Bureau's switchboard and
were then referred to the Telephone Room in Mr. Hoover's office and the
employees in the Telephone Room handled the problem of connecting
Mr. Hoover with the caller. They wanted to know whether employees in
the Telephone Room screened Mr. Hoover's telephone calls and they were
informed Telephone Room employees did not screen them except for "nut"
calls.
(9) During a rather heated conversation in the afternoon
✓ about some of the questioning being done which seemed to be repetitious and
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 122
- 3 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_121.jpeg ---
(2) Sometime during the interview, Mr. Gitenstein
raised a question about "Expedite Processing" of mail and how it was
handled in Mr. Hoover's office. Miss Gandy pointed out that the
handling of personal and confidential mail for Mr. Hoover was
handled by Miss Mooney and she, Miss Gandy, was not aware of
personal and confidential
just how this mail was handled. I explained that all mail received
in the Routing Unit of the Records and Communications Division
was taken unopened to Miss Mooney in Mr. Hoover's office where
she opened this mail and the clerical employee who brought the mail
down then logged it in and stamped the mail "Expedite Processing"
on the left-hand edge. Thereafter the clerica employee would take
the log back to the Routing Unit and when the mail was subsequently
returned to the Routing Unit for regular filing purposes the item
would be crossed off the log. Mr. Gitenstein wanted to know
if the "Expedite Processing" logs were maintained permanently and
he was informed that to my knowledge they were not kept after accounting
for the particular items of mail contained on the particular log.
(3) Mr. Epstein questioned Miss Gandy at length
concerning her title as "Executive Assistant." He wanted to know when
she acquired this title and she said she could not recall. He wanted
to know whether anyone else at the FBI had occupied this position and
Miss Gandy explained that she was the only employee with the
title of Executive Assistant who had served under Mr. Hoover during
his tenure in office. Mr. Epstein seemed to pay a great deal of
attention to the title Executive Assistant and I endeavored to explain
to him that the title was a Civil Service Commission title and that
Miss Gandy's position was set up under the Classification Act administered
by the Civil Service Commission. Although I am not sure what was
behind Mr. Epstein's lengthy questioning about this matter, I got the
impression he might be trying to find out if Miss Gandy acted for Mr. Hoover
on her own initiative. This is just a guess on my part and I am not sure
what was behind his questioning.
(4) During Miss Gandy's description of the various
offices, she did mention specifically the fact that the interesting case
files were maintained on the shelves in the big conference room in black
folders. They asked what the interesting case files consisted of and I
explained this to their satisfaction; namely, that they were writeups of
closed cases which might be of interest for various purposes.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 121
- 2 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_124.jpeg ---
i
(12) Miss Gandy refers to the fact that questions were
raised concerning Mr. Hoover's back door entrance. The questions
concerning this back door were to determine just who used this
back door entrance and its purpose. In addition to explaining it was
immediately adjacent to the elevators at 9th and Pennsylvania Avenue
which Mr. Hoover used to enter and exit the building, they were also
advised that this was Mr. Hoover's private and personal entrance and
that persons wishing to see Mr. Hoover were not brought through this
back door.
The foregoing is submitted for information purposes and
as an auxiliary record of Miss Gandy's appearance before the Staff of the
Senate Select Committee on May 15, 1975, accompanied by me,
John P. Mohr.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 124
- 5 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_117.jpeg ---
2.
_
30.
✓
Kaind
2
He was immediately corrected by me to the effect
that no such connection existed with Attorneys
General other than Attorney General Kennedy.
I answered that I did receive calls from persons wishing
to speak with the Director; that, if he were in his office,
such calls. would be transferred to the Director's Office
telephone room to be connected with the Director if he
should be in his office and could take the call. (Here
Mr. Mohr explained in detail the system of handling tele-
phone calls in the Director's office and the functions of
the FBI telephone switchboard.)
It was explained that the file cabinets in my office
contained strictly personal correspondence of the Director%;B
that from time to time during the past fifty years files
which were no longer current were eliminated.
Re the so-called o.c. files. it was explained that these
files were located in one of the locked cabinets; that there
were, possibly one and a half or two file drawers of these.
In answer to questioning it was explained that on the day
of Mr. Hoover's death I spoke with both Mr. Tolson, who at
that time was Acting Director, and Mr. Mohr, and asked for
instructions as to whom I should deliver the official-
confidential files and other Bureau material contained in
the Director's offices. I also advised Mr. Tolson of
Mr. Hoover's expressed instructions that his personal
correspondence be destroyed, and that he, Mr. Hoover, had
begun a review of these personal files sometime previous to
his death, and some already had been destroyed. Mr. Tolson
instructed that the official-confidential files and all
other Bureau material, ie, Interesting Cases; monographs,
Manuals, be delivered to Mr. Mark Felt. (Here, I was asked
where the Bureau material was kept and answered that book-
cases in my office were used for this purpose.
I was exhaustively questioned by Mr. Epstein as to whether
I called Mr. Tolson (and where he was located at the time)
or whether Mr. Tolson called me. I told him that at this
late date I had no idea as to who called whom, but that he
was assured that Mr. Tolson and I communicated. I also was
asked when Mr. Tolson arrived at Mr. Hoover's house on the
morning in question and/was told Mr. Tolson arrived after
Mr. Hoover's body was discovered. (I asked if more details
of that morning were desired and was told no.)
I explained that instructions were immediately carried out;
the o.c. files, with the index cards pertaining to them,
together with the above mentioned Bureau material, was placed
in cartons and delivered to Mr. Felt. I was asked who carried
these cartons to Mr. Felt's office and said I could not at
this date answer this but I believe they would have been
carried by either messengers or maintenance personnel.
"
*There was quite much questioning here as to how and where the
index cards were filed. It was explained that they were filed
in the one index file, cards of a different color being used,
and that this file also was locked.
3
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 117

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_125.jpeg ---
E: SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
FROM:
TO: Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
Federal Bureau of Investigation
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
1. HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
2. DATE PROVIDED
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY
OTHER
6/12/74
3. TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
4.
SSC
HSC
Memorandum containing results of interview provided to
Attorney General and to Mr. James A. Wilderotter,
Associate Counsel to the President.
IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name or identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Miss Helen W. Gandy, former Executive Assistant to the Director
of the FBI.
5.
IN RESPONSE TO (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
(NOT APPLICABLE)
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
Fi
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
Management
Operating Procedures
ALL INFORMATION CONTALE
HEREIN IS
DATE: 1-PL-2000 BX SPEALM/Buf
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
MDP-16
Miss Gandy was questioned by Staff Members of SSC concerning
the organizational and operational procedures followed in former
Director Hoover's office, as well as maintenance of and disposition
of the files of the former Director marked "Official and
Confidential."
TJM:1hb
(4)
62-116395
TREAT AS YELLOW
Woc
Eu
5-TAM
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75.
6-24-75 LFS
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
3791 (6.75)
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 125
1
'

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_126.jpeg ---
INSTRUCTIONS
3
271-10029
Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
"FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
-
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewee is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required. Additional
pages may be attached if necessary.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 126

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_123.jpeg ---
*2
D
irrelevant, Mr. Gitenstein was told by me that I felt it was high time
the questioners quit "beating around the bush" and came to the point by
asking Miss Gandy if she had ever destroyed any official and
confidential files. Mr. Gitenstein replied they had a discrepancy
concerning the O and C files in that a reliable source had reported
that Mr. Mark Felt had five two-drawer cabinets marked "O and C Files"
in his office. Miss Gandy on the other hand told Mr. Gitenstein in
response to a question that she had turned over to Mr. Felt after
Mr. Hoover's death, as she recollected, one and one-half drawers and
possibly two drawers of O and C files. I explained to Mr. Gitenstein
that Miss Gandy would have no way of knowing what files Mr. Felt had
in his office and if there was a discrepancy the person to resolve the
discrepancy was Mr. Felt who Mr. Gitenstein had told me previously
had been interviewed by him and had been cooperative. I had previously
explained to Mr. Gitenstein in response to questions he asked me when I
appeared before the Staff that at the time Mr. William C. Sullivan had
furnished the data of the 17 White House telephone taps to Mr. Mardian in
the Internal Security Division of the Department that Mr. Hoover had
instructed that any Assistant Director or Bureau official who had any
files in his office he considered to be confidential and relating to the
Bureau's work were to be immediately transferred to Mr. Felt and
a memorandum prepared concerning exactly what was transferred to
Mr. Felt. I told Mr. Gitenstein I had no idea how many files Mr. Felt
collected as a result of Mr. Hoover's instructions. It is interesting to
note that I was not asked at any time whether I had turned over any files.
to Mr. Felt in connection with Mr. Hoover's instructions.
(10) Miss Gandy was asked whether there were any files
of Mr. Hoover's personal correspondence in Mr. Hoover's former home
at the present time. Miss Gandy replied no.
(11) At some point during the interview a reference was
made to the confidential trash baskets maintained in the Bureau, to wit,
the trash baskets with the painted rim on top. Mr. Epstein wanted to
know if a log was maintained of items placed in the confidential trash
baskets for destruction. I informed him it would be ridiculous to think
that such a log could be maintained and he was advised exactly how
confidential trash is destroyed in the Bureau. He was also informed of
the Bureau files that were scattered over the streets of Southwest Washington
as a result of the Department of Justice engaging in destruction of some of
their files. This reference permitted an immediate termination of any
questions along the lines of the destruction of confidential trash.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 123
-
4-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_129.jpeg ---
17
TO: Harold R. Tyler, Jr.
Deputy Attorney General
FROM: Bill O'Connor
June 9, 1975 ·
This letter follows up the dialogue
described in my memo of June 5; Mr. Mintz
advised me on June 9, that the Bureau would
respond promptly with its views. I am
supplying Mr. Mintz a copy of this letter
for his file.
cc: Mr.
cc: Mr. Mintz
*
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED,
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
NAU
5P24cm/pup
DATE 10-16-2010 BY SPRAU
MDR-16
MEET
pm 31213
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 129
Enclosure
F
62-116395-
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_131.jpeg ---
S
"
14
FR
FREE SICH ALS
F
CUPT.
1
The Honorable Edward H. Levi
Page Two
IL
June 9, 1975
These requests do not preclude the Committee from further
pursuing its original request for COINTELPRO materials.
Finally, I cannot emphasize too much the importance
to the Select Committee's work of fully understanding COINTEL-
PRO matters. In this regard, I wish to thank you again for
calling the new materials, which we will follow up in due
course, to our attention.
"
Sincerely,
Aran
Frank Church
Chairman
Chin
41
NW 88326 Docld:32989611. Page 131
:
:
11
M

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_128.jpeg ---
W
**
11
Done
6/11/75
O'Connor
Suggested
excised material
/ be prepared/
ADDENDUM: INTELLIGENCE DIVISION
||ABF:glw
6/10/75 ABF:glw
Intelligence Division strongly feels Exhibits A through E should not
be made available. These constitute work papers prepared on an expedite
basis by Special Agents operating under the understanding their effort was
of a rough draft nature which would be utilized by a committee of the Justice
Department and FBI for an in-house investigation. The Agents preparing
the documents never conceived that their effort would be subject to review
outside of the Department and particularly outside the Executive Branch.
By letter dated 4/21/75 to the Attorney General it was pointed
out these exhibits related to the internal deliberations of the Department
and FBI representatives, some of the material in these summaries is
classified and relates to sensitive operations and they should not be revealed.
Also, Deputy Attorney General Lawrence Silberman in testimony before the
Civil Rights and Constitutional Rights Subcommittee (Edwards Committee)
on 11/20/74 indicated as regards these documents, "If we had thought it was
appropriate to release the full discussion we would have done so at the time.
There are a lot of internal working documents which go into the making of a
final report. **
Further, if these documents are released to the SSC, or if the
Committee is allowed access to them, we would not then be in a position to
deny access to them by the Edwards Committee or the House Select Committee
on Intelligence (Nedzi). Should they be released and come within the public
domain, we could then be in a position of violating individual rights of privacy
and compromising sensitive investigative techniques and Bureau sources.
We feel we should first go through these work papers and excise such items
to avoid any such complication.
INTD recommends Legal Counsel advise Mr. O'Connor we strongly
object to the release of the above Exhibits to the SSC. However, we
recognize our objection may be overruled by the Attorney General; and if so,
we would request we have an opportunity to make the excisions noted above
prior to the Department turning the Exhibits over to the SSC.
on expedite basis.
I so adrised Dave Ryan 6/1/7
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 128
2
will
gin
gl

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_127.jpeg ---
5
C
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA FPAIR (4) CFR 101-11.6
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
TO
: Mr. J. B. Adams
FROM : Legal Counsel
In
DATE: 6/10/75
Intellige
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD. Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
-
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laborator
Legal Sou
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
-
-
-
SUBJECT: SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
on
Activities
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN D
HREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
MDR-16
DATE 10-16-2000 BY.
3
On 6/9/75, Mr. K. William O'Connor advised me that the
Senate Select Committee would like to obtain access to Appendices A
through E of the original Petersen Committee report on COINTELPRO.
He advised that the Deputy Attorney General had requested him to
determine by the morning of 6/10/75 whether the FBI would object to
disclosing the Appendices to the Committee. Subsequently, Mr. O'Connor
sent me a copy of a notehe addressed to the Deputy Attorney General
dated 6/9/75, and its enclosure (a copy of a letter from Senator Church
to the Attorney General dated 6/9/75), both of which pertain to the
Senate Select Committee request to have access to Appendices A through
E of the Petersen report. The letter also requests access to Appendices
K and L for inspection by designated Committee staff at the Department of
Justice (Copies of these two are attached).
ORIGINAL FILED IN 62-1160
-7x
Previously, the Intelligence Division has been requested to
review Appendices A through E which are summaries of the several
CONINTELPRO programs. This memorandaмshould be referred to the
Intelligence Division to indicate the need to expedite that review and to
furnish appropriate recommendations to the Director concerning any
objections the FBI should have to disclosure of the Appendices requested.
In view of the urgency of the information furnished by Mr. O'Connor
it is suggested that this memorandum serve as the authority for the disclosing
of the requested Appendices in the absence of any strong objections by the
Intelligence Division.
RECOMMENDATION:
62-116395-
NOT RECORDED
6 JUN 20 1975
Legal Counsel Division utbrze advise Mr. O'Connor on
the morning of 6/10/75, that the FBI will defer to the judgment of the Deputy
Attorney General in regard to disclosure of Appendices A through E of the
Petersen report and of limited access to Appendices K and L by designated
staff representatives. _
1 - Mr. Wannall
F1 -
3
1
J. Grogar Enclosure
Mr. Hotis
NW 88326, Docid:3298961 Page 127
MEXXX
SEE ADDENDUM: INTD PAGE 2
62-116009
=

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_13.jpeg ---
youn
TO
:
FROM
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA FPMR (41 CFR) 101-11.6
UNITED STATE
"MENT
Memorandum
Mr. J. B. Adams
Legal Counsel
Inter
SUBJECT:
SENSTUDY 75
DATE:
6-19-75
Assoc. Dir.
k
Dep. AD Aẩm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Legal Coun.
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Soc'y
Reference is made to my memo dated 6-2-75, that a
luncheon with staff members of the Senate Select Committee
Task Force conducting the inquiry into the FBI be held with
the Director.
Mr. Kelley approved the recommendation, and Mr. Elliff,
Domestic Task Head for the Committee, was asked whether he would
like to attend a luncheon with Mr. Kelley and he indicated he
would, but would have to check with the Committee. Mr. Elliff
was advised that the Director's schedule permitted a luncheon
be held on June 24, 1975, at 12:30 p.m..
-
Mr. Elliff stated on 6-18-75, he will attend the luncheon
along with the following staff members of the Committe: Lester B.
Seidel, John Smith, William Ricks, Michael Epstein, and Mark
Gitenstein.
In addition to the staff members, Section Chief
A
William O. Cregar, Inspector John B. Hotis, and SA Paul V. Daly
will attend. Assistant Director John A. Mintz will also attend luncheon.
RECOMMENDATION:
SA Elmo
Larson
misters of
Cragar.
adam at Wennall
will any
adenet
1
elmi
1
-
-
-
For information.
120x
Mrs. Metcalf
Mr. Wannall
Mr. Cregar
-
Mr. Mintz
Mr. Hotis
1
-
1
-
Mr. Daly
PVD:eek
(8)
D
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-17-2000 BY SPRAUM/
MDR-16
REC-26
EX-117
62-116395-334
3 JUN 25 1975
1 4 1975
NW 88326° Docld:32989611 Page 13
Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_130.jpeg ---
i
I
17
13
3
7
•
FRANK CHURCH, IDAHO, CHAIRMA
JOHN G. TOWER, TEXAS, VICE CHAIA
PHILIP A. HART, MICH.
K
WALTER F. MONDALE, MINN.
WALTER D. HŮDOLESTON; KY,
MOBERT MORGAN, N.C.
GARY HART, COLO.
'
HOWARD H. BAK
BARRY GOL
CHARLES N
RICHARD S.
VEIKER, PA.
WILLIAM G. MILLER, STAFF DIRECTOR
FREDERICK A. Q. SCHWARZ, JR., CHIEF COUNSEL
CURTIS R. SMOTHERS, MINORITY COUNSEL
JR., TENN.
KER, ARIZ.
ATHIAS, JR., MD.
United States Senate
SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
(PURSUANT TO S. RES. 21, 94TH CONGRESS)
WASHINGTON, D.C.. 20510
June 9, 1975
"
: The Honorable Edward H. Levi
Attorney General
Department of Justice
Washington, D. C. 20530
Dear Mr. Attorney General:
Thank you for your letters of May 17 and May 23,
1975, informing the Select Committee of five additional
COINTELPRO-type operations disclosed by the continuing FBI
review of its counterintelligence files. The Committee ap-
preciates your candor in disclosing the sensitive aspects of
these programs. Pursuant to its rules, the Committee will
handle this information with the necessary security.
I have been informed that a member of the Commit-
tee staff has inspected and taken notes on the 39-page
report of the Petersen committee on COINTELPRO. I believe
that our security arrangements are more than sufficient to
safeguard the confidentiality of its contents. The Commit-
tee members themselves as well as the staff would be con-
venienced by its availability in our secure facilities.
I believe that it is vitally important for the Com-
mittee to be provided with Appendices A through E of that
report. These documents will also be handled according to
our stringent security arrangements. In addition, Appendices
K and L should be made available for inspection by designated
Committee staff at the Department of Justice. I understand
that these appendices are not "raw files" of the FBI.
-FBI
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN D
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-16-2010 BY SPRALM/
MDR-16
62-116325-
-NW-88326- Docld:32989611 Page 130
Enclosure

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_132.jpeg ---
4
Eac
baji
-
n
3471
"
IT
3
JUN 5 1975
TO: Harold R. Tyler, Jr.
Deputy Attorney General
FROM:
-SUBJECT
K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
COINTELPRO/Petersen Report
On June 4, 1975, Mr. Elliff of SSC reviewed the
39-page Petersen Report. Afterwards, he had a confer-
ence with me from 4:15 to 4:45. The conference resulted
in a modification of the previous request. I told him
I would be back in touch with him at an appropriate time.
He also indicated a probable future course of action by
the Committee.
The modification is as follows:
As to Appendices A-E (the summaries prepared by
the FBI of certain COINTELPRO operations) Committee
staff access is requested. Mr. Elliff advised that he
understood that the FBI raw files question was most
sensitive, and that he would propose to have staff of
the Committee review these Exhibits, and, if the infor-
mation in these Exhibits was not sufficient for their
purposes, to then request an expanded summary of any
particular topic summarized, without reaching the issue
of access to the Bureau's "raw files".
As to F-J-Staff Assessments he feels these are
not of pressing present importance,
As to K-L (summary reports on espionage matters),
he would like personal access; he does not view this
as important as A-E above.
As to M & N (Criminal Division legal memoranda)
these are not of immediate interest,
cc:
Maroney
✓ Daly
62-116395-
memo Wannall
to Alams
DRiple
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
DATE 10-16-2000 20
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
MDR-16
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 132
Enclosure
62-116009
5-se
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_136.jpeg ---
71
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
NOTE CONTINUED:
Attorney General for his approval and subsequent transmittal
to-Mr. Nedzi. In accord with the recommendation in memorandum
from G. R. Steel to Mr. W. V. Cleveland 6/10/75, a copy is
also being furnished to the Attorney General for transmittal
to the Senate Select Committee.
- 2 -
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 136
E

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_133.jpeg ---
-1
As to 0-FBI public statement
-
no interest.
I would
As to P (the overall FBI recommendation), he :
would like personal access.
like
I discussed as an alternative, access to the
initiating documents in the COINTELPRO matters%3B and
that I would attempt to obtain those as an alternative
solution to his inquiry. He said that he might be
interested in those documents, but they were far less
important to him than access to A-E. He reiterated
his sensitivity to the question of raw files, and
indicated a strong inclination to avoid the raw files
question, proceeding by the proposed expanded summaries
route if necessary, with expanded summaries to be pre-
pared only in the event of specific questions being
raised after staff access to A-E.
He then went on to state that he perceived a
significance in the recommendation and proposals of the
Petersen Report%; and that he felt FBI and DOJ policies
might be perceived as at loggerheads, although this was
muted in the prose. He said that he felt sure that, at
an appropriate time, the Committee would wish to explore,
by AG testimony at SSC, the actions of the DOJ on the
recommendation reflected in the report. I said that I
understood his interest in that process.
My recommendation is that, in view of the retrench-
ment regarding "raw files", A-E be made available, under
the conditions outlined above; I am furnishing a copy of
this memorandum to Mr. Daly for dissemination to appro-
priate Executives of the Bureau, and to Mr. Maroney of
the Criminal Division.
I believe a prompt decision as to A-E would be
most helpful.
x =
Anwar I M
- 2 -
-
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 133
37775
L

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_135.jpeg ---
62-116464
1 - Mr.
Mr. J. B. Adams
1
-
Mr. W. V. Cleveland
2 - Mr. J. A. Mintz
(1 - Mr. J. B. Hotis)
1 - Mr. W. R. Wannall
June 19, 1975
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. L. F. Schwartz
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
nat
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD inv.
Asst. Dir.:
-
Attached is a copy of a memorandum entitled
"Procedures for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information or Material on the Part of Employees
of the Senate and House Select Committees on Intelligence
Activities," which has been prepared pursuant to the oral
request of Representative Lucien N. Nedzi. The procedures
outlined in the enclosed memorandum are already being
followed with regard to the Senate Select Committee, which
has been furnished a copy separately.
Enclosure
1 - The Attorney General
LFS: dmt/1hb lhb
(10)
NOTE:
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN
HELN IS UNCI
DATE 10-11-2000
MDR-16 SPLACK/Bup
DAM
W
Eu
Representative Nedzi orally requested preparation
of a Memorandum of Understanding setting forth investigative
and clearance procedures which we have been following with
the SSC and which Mr. Nedzi indicated would be agreeable
to his Committee. The Memorandum of Understanding was prepared
Dep. AD Adm. - and was coordinated with CIA and appropriate representatives
of the Intelligence Community Staff who recommended certain
changes which were set forth in memorandum from W. O. Cregar
to Mr. W. R. Wannall, 6/3/75. The latter memorandum recommended
that the revised Memorandum of Understanding be forwarded to the
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
MAIL ROOM
NOTE CONTINUED PAGE 2
62-116395-819
TELETYPE UNIT
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 135
ENCLOSURE
Par
mym
GPO 954-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_137.jpeg ---
5-140 (Rev. 1-21-74) FEVERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
A essee:
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20535
House Select Committee
OPTR ☑ LHM
Memo ☐ Report dated
6/19/75
House Select Committee on Intelligence Actvts
Caption of Document: Procedures for Determining Eligibil-
ity on the Part of Employees of the Senate and
House Select Committees on Intelligence
Activities
Originating Office:
FBI
Richard
-raylest
415
Sa Rr. 6/25/75
Delivered by:
Received by:
Title:
Staff Director
Return this receipt to the Intelligence Division, FBI
Date:
P
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 137
ALL INFORMATION CON
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFI
DATE 10-1-200 DX Spisem/Brup
MOR-16

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_134.jpeg ---
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Admi
Dep. ADI
Asst. Dir.
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
-
Plan. & Eval.
Sm
1.
-
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (HSC)
BUREAU FILE 62-116464
SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
BUREAU FILE 62-1163957
REC- 104
-316
NHH
-
2
LIE
1
1
M J. B. Adams
Mr. W. V. Cleveland
Mr. J. A. Mintz
(1 - Mr. J. B. Hotis)
June 19, 1975
- Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. L. F. Schwartz
9/7911
27 NIGHT
Enclosed herewith for your approval and transmittal
to the HSC and the SSC are separate memoranda each enclosing
a memorandum entitled "Procedures for Determining Eligibility
for Access to Classified Information or Naterial on the Part
of Employees of the Senate and House Select Committees on
Intelligence Activities," which was prepared at the oral
request of Representative Lucien II. Nedzi and which has been
coordinated with the intelligence community.
Copies of the memoranda and enclosures are being
Furnished for your records.
Enclosures - 8
1
-
The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. William O'Connor
2- ENCLOSURE
LFS: dmt/1hb,'//
(12)
Howa
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
UNHMREGIEDRYC
6/25/95
Nadecy Mec
ALL INFORMATIO
ADALINISCI
Fra 10-11-PRDR-16
I.
ED
wrc.
Pen
Et
LES
4
(ii)
a
m.
☑
MAD-TROOM ✓
NW 88006 Docid:32989611 Page 134
TELETYPE UNIT
wo.
4 c bagi e
GPO 1975 O - 569-920

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_138.jpeg ---
Subject:
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTAND ING
Procedures for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information or Material on the Part
of Employees of the Senate and House Select
Committees on Intelligence Activities
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) will conduct
background investigations at the request of the appropriate
Committee Chairman of applicants and employees of the respective
staffs of above-mentioned Committees, so that a determination can
be made as to their suitability for employment and as to their
trustworthiness for access to classified information in accordance
with Executive Order 11652 and, where necessary, for access to
compartmented information in accordance with the standards set
forth in Director of Central Intelligence Directive 1-14.
The FBI will furnish a summary memorandum containing
the results of its investigation to the appropriate Committee
Chairman.
In the case of an applicant, or employee, the Committee
Chairman will make a determination as to the person's suitability
for employment.
No person shall be given access to any classified
information or material unless such person has been determined
ALL INFORMATION C.
HEREIN IS UNCLASSED
DATE 10-11-200
MDR-16
STRALM/Pap
62-116395-=316
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 138
ENCLOSURE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_139.jpeg ---
W
1
by the respective Chairman to be trustworthy and unless
access to such information or material is necessary in the
performance of the person's duties.
Where there is a question of trustworthiness for
access to classified information, the Committee Chairman may
wish to have the summary memorandum furnished to the Director
of Central Intelligence (DCI) by the FBI, with a request for
the DCI's advice. In all instances, the Committee Chairman
will make the final determination.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 139
- 2 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_141.jpeg ---
INSTRUCTIONS
Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
"FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions. (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
-
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewee is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required. Additional
pages may be attached if necessary.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 141
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_144.jpeg ---
Memorandum to Mr. Cleveland
Re: Senate and House Select Committees
on Intelligence Activities
RECOMMENDATION:
That the recommendation in referenced
memorandum of 6-3-75, with regard to not furnishing a
copy of the Memorandum of Understanding to Senator Church
be reconsidered.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 144
-3-
wre
PLM
John
Jmr

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_140.jpeg ---
YTE:
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
FROM:
FBI
TO: Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
1. HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY | OTHER
3. TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
☑ SSC
2. DATE PROVIDED
6/19/75
HSC
4. IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name or identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Memorandum with an attached Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
5.
IN RESPONSE TO (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
Representative Lucien N. Nedzi, Chairman, HSC,
orally requested MOU regarding investigation and
clearance procedures
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
U
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
Agreements, other
Organization and Staffing
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
MOU entitled "Procedures for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information or Material on the Part of Employees
of the Senate and House Select Committees on Intelligence
Activities," furnished to HSC and SSC.
62-116395
62-116464
SFP:1hb
(6)
ALL INFORMATION COIF
HEREIN IS UNCLASSEND
DATE 10-11-2000 BXSPRAU/
MDRY4
TREAT AS YELLOW
L
5
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75. LFS-7-2-25
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
3791 (6.75)
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 140

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_14.jpeg ---
Memo to Mr. Adams from Legal Counsel
Re: STATUS OF RESPONSES TO CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE REQUESTS
for denying
GAO access to Bureau files. A response has
been prepared and furnished the Department.
Subcommittee on Civil Rights and Constitutional Rights
of the Judiciary (Edwards Committee)
The Department has advised the Chief Counsel
Alan Parker and Minority Counsel Ken Klee that excised
appendices a through e of the Peterson Report on COINTELPRO
are available for their review in Department space.
Subcommittee on Government Information and Individual
Rights (Abzug's Committee)
By letter dated June 10, and June 16, 1975,
we have been requested to furnish complete information
concerning practices and procedures, etc., concerning
electronic surveillances. Information is being gathered
so that appropriate responses may be provided.
Hearings
We are scheduled to testify 7-9-75, before the
Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security of the Judiciary
on Terrorism. Testimony for this hearing has been prepared
by the Intelligence Division.
We anticipate having to testify before the Post
Office, Civil Service Subcommittee on Postal Fees, Mail
and Label Management. The necessary materials for the
testimony have been gathered and as soon as a request has
been received, the testimony will be prepared in final
form. The testimony will concern mail covers.
The following Committees have indicated Bureau
testimony in the near future:
11
The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitutional
Rights (Tunney's Committee); Topic: S. 1427 - S. 1428 (Criminal
Justice legislation); Briefing book has been prepared con-
cerning this legislation.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE: 10-11-2000 BY Sproumpor
MDR-16
- 3 -
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 14
:

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_143.jpeg ---
Memorandum to Mr. Cleveland
Re: Senate and House Select Committees
on Intelligence Activities
Referenced memorandum pointed out that Mr. Clarke
and Mr. Moore were of the opinion that since Senator Church's
Committee was already following the procedures outlined in
the Memorandum of Understanding, and had completed the
Committee Staff, it would be inappropriate to furnish a copy
of the Memorandum of Understanding to Senator Church. How
would the Senate Select Committee know it is following the
procedures outlined in the Memorandum of Understanding if
it does not have a copy? Does it have a copy of DCID 1/14
which has been, and possibly still is, classified?
The FBI has now received a request for a total
of 122 investigations from the Senate Select Committee.
This is many more than anticipated with all expenses absorbed
by the FBI in connection with a function of the Legislative
Branch. In addition, 16 requests have been received to
date from the House Select Committee. Also the FBI has been
asked by the Senate Select Committee to conduct additional
investigation concerning Patricia Ann Monaco, already employed
by the Committee, who admits living with Neal Stevens up
to 4-75, and frequenting a lounge known as a hangout for
prostitutes. Neal Stevens has said he engaged "in all forms
of sexual activities" with Monaco. There is also the definite
possibility that we will have to process many of these cases
under the Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act of 1974.
To date notification has been received from the
Director of Central Intelligence (CIA) that a total of 49
employees of the Senate Select Committee have been certified
as meeting requirements of EO 10450 (Security Requirements
for Government Employment) for access to classified information
up to and including Top Secret. Of this number, 17 staff
members have been briefed on compartmented information and an
additional 5 staff members designated to receive compartmented
information. From the above it is not clear that, as stated
by Mr. Clarke and Mr. Moore, that the Senate Select Committee
"had completed the Committee Staff."
It is noted that CIA refers to EO 10450 but the
Memorandum of Understanding, as approved by CIA, does not
refer to EO 10450.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 143
-2-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_142.jpeg ---
TO
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
"MAY 1962 EDITION
GLAGEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
Mr. Cleveland
FROM
G. R. Steel 95
93
SUBJECT
DATE:
SENATE AND HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEES
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
6-10-75
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm. _
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
Reference is made to the memorandum of Mr. W. O. Cregar
to Mr. W. R. Wannall dated 6-3-75, concerning the above committees
Attached for approval was a revised draft of the Memorandum of
Understanding concerning clearance procedures for Staff Members
of captioned Committees. It was pointed out that in accordance
with opinion expressed by John M. Clarke, Associate Deputy,
Intelligence Community Staff, and Donald E. Moore, Chairman,
Security Committee, U. S. Intelligence Board, a copy of the
Memorandum of Understanding will not be furnished to Senator Church.
The revised draft is to be furnished the Attorney General for
approval.
SSCVHSC
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS
MDR-16
DATE 10-6-200 DY.
WHY A
-
6/18/75
941; +hp:5=7
.
+ 127
his
It is felt that we are confronted with a complex legal 3
problem here and it would appear that if the Senate Select
Committee is a party to the Memorandum of Understanding, it is
entitled to a copy of such communication to prevent any misun-
derstanding in the future and to protect the FBI which has drawn
up this Memorandum of Understanding.
Inserted in the revised draft are references to
Executive Order (EO) 11652 and Director of Central Intelligence
Directive (DCID) No. 1/14. Both are limited in their stated
application to the Executive Branch and here their application
is being extended to the Legislative Branch, which apparently
has no established clearance procedure nor suitability for
employment program. Of particular interest is that part of
the "Personnel Security Approval Criteria" under DCID 1/14
which reads: "The individual shall be stable, of excellent
character and discretion and of unquestioned loyalty to the
United States."
62-116395
1 Mr. Adams
1
1
1
-
-
Mr. Mintz
-
Mr. Wannall
-
Mr. Cregar
RHE:mem
REC 104
62-116395-316
3 JUL 7 1975
1
Mr. Schwartzu
1
Mr. Cleveland
1
Mr. Steel
1
Mr. Egan
CONTINUED OVER
=
CC 62-116.464
Recorde
UNRECORDED COPY FILED IN
5. Apfelwitz
GS
TIFORMATION-CONFT
13 UCLASSIFIED
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 142
'

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_145.jpeg ---
TJM:16 6/26/75
Let to AG
PARIMENT
DOMINA
OF
**
JUSTICE
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20530
JUN 23 1975
a
John A. Mintz
Senaturaly
Legal Counsel Division -
Federal Bureau of Investigation
FROM: K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for Intelligence
Coordination
SUBJECT: Access to Bureau Files Re Halperin Case
75
Pursuant to my conversation with S/A McNiff, it is requested
that the Bureau files in this matter be made available under
controlled circumstances to Mr. Shaheen for his review in order
to facilitate the Department's resolution of pending requests from
the Senate Select Committee.
This memorandum has been discussed with Mr. McNiff, and he
anticipates that it will be sent to you.
REC-104
FBI
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-5-2011 BY SM
MOR-16
62-116395315
3 JUL 7 1975
62-116395
8 JUL 17 1975
RICAN
REVOL
ON
10742
NM 88326 Docld!32989611 Page 145
Records
cc: 65-75085
5-TIM
UNRECORDED COPY FILED IN
--75785
1
i
1
1
t

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_146.jpeg ---
2 - Mr. J. A. Mintz
1
-
(1 - Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
June 26, 1975
p
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
0
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. J. W. Dalseg
Mr. T. J. McNiff
1
MO
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
-
-
Inspection
Intell,
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director
$
-
C
/
Reference is made to memorandum from K. William
O'Connor, Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination,
Office of the Deputy Attorney General, to Assistant Director
John A. Mintz, Legal Counsel Division, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, dated June 23, 1975, captioned "Access to
Bureau Files Re Halperin Case."
Pursuant to request contained in referenced
communication, Bureau files relating to the Halperin case
are available for review under controlled circumstances, at
FBI Headquarters, by Mr. Michael E. Shaheen, Jr., Deputy
Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination, Department
of Justice.
It would be appreciated if Mr. Shaheen would
telephonically contact Special Agent Thomas J. McNiff of
this Bureau, Government Interdepartmental Code 175, Extension
4636, for the purpose of finalizing the date and time at
which the requested review will be made.
62-116395
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. William O'Connor
1 - 65-75085
TJM:1hblhh
(11)
elm
AIL ROOM
Special Counsel for 62 116 395
Intelligence Coordination
BEC-104
65-75-783
UNRECORDED COPY FILED IN
UNRE
116 395-314
F
JUL 17 1975
SEE NOTE PAGE 2
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
TELETYPE UNDE
KM 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 146
1
ATE 5/10/82 11/7858-52/c/
Comp#57,082
✓
Tilri
JA
GPO 551-346
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_148.jpeg ---
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm. _
-
Dep. AD Inv.
J. B. Adams
FROM :
Legal Counsel
SUBJECT:
DATE: April 23, 1975
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
**
J
By memorandum dated April 18, 1975, we advised
the Attorney General that one document (memorandum dated
May 20, 1954, captioned "Microphone Surveillance")
requested by captioned Committee originated with the
Department and the determination as to whether or not it
should be released to the Committee should be made by
the Department. It was also pointed out to the Department
this particular document, while it is classified, had
been printed publicly by the United States Government
Printing Office.
DOCUMENT
DECLASSIFIED 4/28/15
BY TE.BURNS
per EMSTRUCTION.
4/28/15 KB
On April 22, 1975, Jack Fuller, Assistant to
the Attorney General, telephonically advised the Department
was declassifying the document and requested the Bureau
declassify its copy.
ACTION:
Asst. Dir.:
Admin. "
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Laboratory
Legal Coun.
Plant & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
-
-
Intelligence Division declassify Departmental
Memorandum captioned, "Microphone Surveillance," dated
May 20, 1954.
62-116395
1-Mr. W. R. Wannall
l-Mr. W. O. Cregar
1- Mr. J. A. Mintz
l-Mr. P. V. Daly
PVD:19R
(6)
REC-100
JCF
62-116-395-313
JBA
Pam
00 JUN 10 1975
$1
84 JUL 8 1975
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 148
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE
S
10-5-2016 BY SPLAS
MDR-16
"
11/800

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_151.jpeg ---
5-140 (Rev. 1-21-74) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20535
SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
Addressee:
☐
☐ LTR ☑ LHM
Memo
Report dated 6/4/75
US Senate Select Committee to Study Govt.
F
Caption of Document: Operations with Respect to Intell-
cigence Activities: Re:Further Documents Per-
taining to the FBI and Dept. of Justice; Policies
taining cedures
ang
1055 AM
Originating Office:
Delivered by:
Received by:
Title:
FBI
Richard Tylor, J. Date: June 75
Ass
y
Towell
Manager
Return this receipt to the Intelligence Division, FBI
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
AUM
DATE 10-6-2000 BYSZAL
MDR-16
62-116395-312
ENCLOSURE
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 151

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_149.jpeg ---
14
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
0
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
2 Mr. J. A. Mintz
1
1
1
11
1 Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. O. Cregar
Mr. T. E. Burns
June 4, 1975
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
-
By letter dated May 14, 1975, with attached appendices,
the SSC requested certain documents and other information from
the FBI.
Item number one a. of Part I, "Policies and
Procedures," Appendix B of referenced letter requested
Committee Staff access to all indices and control files
pertaining to SAC Memoranda and SAC Letters for 1960 to the
present.
Enclosed for your approval and forwarding to the
Committee is an original of a memorandum advising the
Committee that the above-requested material is presently
available for examination at FBI Headquarters by appropriately
cleared personnel of the Committee.
A copy of this memorandum is being furnished for
your records.
Enclosures (2)
62-116395
3 ENCLOSURE
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. William O'Connor
-
TEB: cmc
(9)
Files & Com. _
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun
Telephone Rm.
+
EX-108
"
REC-63 62-116395-312
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
✓P.U.
JUL 15 1975
1975
MALL ROO
Roon
1/509513
TELETYPE UNIT
NW 88326 бoeld 429896141 Page 149
Jan
Pein
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 11-5-20BD BY SIZAL
MDR-16
12 JUN 2* 1975'
gr
GPO 954-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_15.jpeg ---
Memo to Mr. Adams from Legal Counsel
Re: STATUS OF RESPONSES TO CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE REQUESTS
House Judiciary Committee on Civil and Con-
stitutional Rights; Topic: H. R. 61 and H. R. 62 (House
version of S. 1427 and S. 1428 (Criminal Justice Legislation).
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activities;
Topic: Bureau legal authority to conduct domestic and
counterintelligence activities. Tentative testimony is
scheduled for late June or early July. We will be furnished
additional details by the Committee as to the various topics
to be covered during this testimony.
berties
The Director along with Kevin Maroney, Deputy
Assistant Attorney General, is scheduled to appear before
the Subcommittee on Courts, Civil Liabilities, and the
Administration of Justice of the Judiciary Committee
(Kastenmier) to testify concerning electronic surveillances, on
6-26-75.
Special Agents Bill D. Williams and Inspector's
Aide Edward D. Hagerty have been requested to appear before
the Committee on Government Operations, Permanent Subcommittee
on Investigations (Jackson's Committee) the topic of their
testimony is to be their inquiry into Drug Enforcement
Agency at the Departments request. The Department has advised
they will make the agents available for testimony on the
morning of 6-19-75.
RECOMMENDATION:
For information.
pus fort
-
Jana
- 4
sup
Por
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-16-2060 EXSRZALM
MDR-16
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 15
i

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_147.jpeg ---
The Attorney General
NOTE:
1
Memoranda 6/17/75 and 6/23/75, W. O. Cregar to
Mr. W. R. Wannall captioned "Senstudy 75" advised that the
Senate Select Committee (SSC) has made several requests of
the Bureau for information and documents relating to the
so-called "Kissinger 17" This material is being made avail-
able to the Department with the caveats that the Government
has not publicly admitted to 15 of the coverages involved
and that some material contained in the file has been
impounded by court order due to the Halperin (one of 17)
civil suit. The decision as to whether or not the material
prepared in response to the SSC's request is to be turned
over to the Committee was left to the Department. As
mentioned in above memoranda, Mr. O'Connor advised that he
believed it necessary for a representative of his office to
personally review the file in question before a knowledgeable
determination could be made as to what material should be
turned over to the SSC. In anticipation of the Department's
request, Legal Counsel Division inquired of the Department's
CAMINAT
Givil Division as to whether the court order of impoundment
would prevent such a review. On 6/20/75, it was ascertained
that USDC Judge John Lewis Smith, who issued the impoundment
order, gave court clearance to make the "Kissinger 17" file
available to the Department for review as indicated above.
KW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 147
¡
- 2.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_150.jpeg ---
62-116395
2
Mr. J. A. Mintz
(1 - Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R.
W. R. Wannall
1
Mr. W. O. Cregar
1
T. E. Burns
June 4, 1975
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT CONTIITTEE
TO STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS
WITH RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: FURTHER DOCUMENTS PERTAINING IO
THE FBI AND DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
POLICIES AUD PROCEDURES
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
-
Telephone Rm. _
1
-
Reference is made to letter dated May 14, 1975,
with attached appendices, requesting certain documents and
other information from the FBI.
Pursuant to your request for access to all indices
and control files partaining to SAC Memoranda and Letters, for
1960 to the present, we currently have such material available
for review at FBI Headquarters by appropriately cleared
personnel of the Committee.
1
-
The Attorney General
TEB:cmck
(8)
NOTE:
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINEDY
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 14-05-2001 BY SPRAM Ap
MDR-16
The
The material available consists of Xeroxes of index
cards covering all SAC Letters and Memos for the period in
question. The cards contain the SAC Letter or Memorandum
number, date, subject matter covered, and the location where
copies of the SAC Letter or Memorandum have been filed.
file numbers have not been excised in order to avoid unnecessary
extensive effort since there is no apparent reason why the
SSC representative could not view such file numbers. The
Xeroxed indices cards commence with SAC Letter 60-1 dated
January 5, 1960, and conclude with SAC Memorandum number 22-75,
dated May 20, 1975.
MAIL RO
gana
ENCLOSURE
NW 88326 Doci 299 Page 150LETYPE UNIT
Pun
11) 15 (
-315
GPO 954-545

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_152.jpeg ---
OTE:
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
FROM:
TO:" Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
Federal Bureau of Investigation
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
J
2. DATE PROVIDED
1. HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY
OTHER
3. TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
x SSC
6/4/75
4.
HSC
IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Further Documents Pertaining to the FBI and Department of Justice.
5.
IN RESPONSE TO" (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
SSC letter 5/14/75, Appendix B, Part 1, Item la.
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
"{}"
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
OPERATING PROCEDURES
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
SSC was advised that internal documents advising field
offices of clarification and/or revisions in operating procedures
are available for review by appropriate SSC personnel at FBI
Headquarters.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 16-5-200D BY
MDR.
TREAT AS YELLOW
Ewy
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75.
6-24-75 LFS
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
83-176375-31
ENCLOSURE
5-774
TJM:1hb
(4)
62-116395
3791 (6-75)
H
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 152

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_153.jpeg ---
INSTRUCTIONS
t
=
Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
"FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
-
w
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewee is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required. Additional
pages may be attached if necessary.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 153

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_156.jpeg ---
The Attorney General
NOTE:
"
By memorandum from Legal Counsel to Mr. J. B. Adams
dated 6/3/75 captioned "Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Activities," Legal Counsel Division transmitted an "Eyes Only"
communication, dated 5/30/75, from the Executive Secretary
of the USIB Ad Hoc Coordinating Group. In its communication
the USIB Group requested that recipients furnish Mr. James A.
Wilderotter, Associate Counsel to the President, with
suggestions for administrative or legislative action relative
to United States intelligence programs.
In response to USIB's request on behalf of
Mr. Wilderotter, INTD Supervisors have been canvassed for
suggestions and results obtained incorporated in communication
being attached for Attorney General's approval. Since USIB's
communication was marked "Eyes Only," we have not specifically
referenced this document in our response to Mr. Wilderotter.
We are, however, providing copies of the USIB letter and our
response for the Attorney General's records and for the Office
of the Deputy Attorney General. The latter action would
appear appropriate, since the Department of Justice was
included among the recipients of the USIB letter, although
Inspector John B. Hotis of the Legal Counsel Division was
erroneously designated as the Departmental addressee by USIB.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 156
-
- 2 -
1
'

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_154.jpeg ---
Legal Counsel to Adams, Memo
Re: STATUS OF RESPONSES TO CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE REQUESTS.
Hearings:
We are scheduled to testify 6-18-75, before the Senate
Subcommittee on Internal Security of the Judiciary on Terrorism.
Testimony for this hearing has been prepared by the Intelligence
Division.
We anticipate having to testify before the Post Office,
Civil Service Subcommittee on Postal Fees, Mail and Label Management.
The necessary materials for the testimony have been gathered and
as soon as a request has been received, the testimony will be
prepared in final form. The testimony will concern mail covers.
The following Committees have indicated that they will
request Bureau testimony in the near future:
The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitutional
Rights (Tunney's Committee); Topic: S. 1427 - S. 1428 (Criminal
Justice legislation); Briefing book has been prepared concerning
this legislation.
House Judiciary Committee on Civil and Constitutional
Rights; Topic: H. R. 61 and H. R. 62 (House version of S. 1427
and S. 1428 (Criminal Justice legislation)).
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activities;
Topic: Bureau legal authority to conduct domestic and counter-
intelligence activities. Tentative testimony is scheduled for
late June or early July. We will be furnished additional details
by the Committee as to the various topics to be covered during
this testimony.
RECOMMENDATION:
For information.
>
18
Ina
Pur
Ofree
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 154
- 3 -
-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_155.jpeg ---
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
SUGGESTIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE AND
LEGISLATIVE ACTION RELATIVE TO
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE PROGRAMS
2
1
1
1
-
Mr. J. A. Mintz
1 - Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. d. Cregar
Mr. A. F. Watters 4
June 17, 1975
**
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
intell.
Laboratory
-
Plan. & Eval.
Eval.
-
-
-
-
istuly 1975
Attached for your approval and forwarding to
Mr. James A. Wilderotter, Associate Counsel to the President,
is a response to a request received from Mr. Wilderotter for
suggestions for administrative and legislative action relative
to the United States intelligence programs.
Mr. Wilderotter's request was forwarded to the FBI
in a May 30, 1975, communication from the United States
Intelligence Board (USIB) Ad Hoc Coordinating Group, a copy
of which is also being enclosed for your information.
Your concurrence in our response is requested.
Enclosures (3)
62-116395
1
Attention:
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-5-2000 BY PALM
MDR-16
The Deputy Attorney General (Enclosures
K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
AFW:kjg/jmnjmn
(9)
Rit
180
Spec. In 6 JUL 08 1975
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
MAIL ROOM
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 155
TELETYPE UNIT
EX 103
REC-7
-
2)
SEE NOTE PAGE 2
Was
Eu
LPS
62-116395- 311.
(highm
J
GPO 1975 O - 569-920

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_157.jpeg ---
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE_
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20505
REC
Intelligence Community Staff
Lindin ol!)
DCI/IC 75-2274
30 June 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Members of the USIB Ad Hoc Coordinating
Group
SUBJECT
:
0
Security Clearances
!
(Senis.tudy 1975
Attached is an updated listing of staff personnel certified
by the Staff Director/Senate Select Committee as meeting the
requirements of Executive Order 10450 for access to classified
information up to and including TOP SECRET. Some of these
individuals have been certified as meeting the requirements of
DCID 1/14 and have been provided the appropriate briefing.
VLFBI INFORMATION CONTAINED
! TREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-29-2000 BY SPZALM,
MDR-16
Attachment
Jack & Thomas
John M. Clarke
Associate Deputy to the DCI
for the Intelligence Community
F
1
WE
84 JUL 3 1975
REC™ 102
62-116395-308
MOTION CONTAINE
BY
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 157
Record's
Please file
62-116395
3 JUL 2 1975
5-8
L
+
"
t

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_159.jpeg ---
Name
Compartmented
Clearance
Designated Briefed
Date and
Place of Birth
Social
Security No.
30 JUN.. 1975
"
(SI, TK, B)
✓ Carter, Barry
✓ Chesnick, Barbara
avis, Lynn
Dawson, Thomas
B 4/24..
12-14-42
Ċal.
567-56-8854
4-18-46.
WI
*390-46-2235
B 4/17(Port) 9-6-43
Fl.
042-36-9155.
TF Badge
+
.B 6/26
9-9-52.
•
Minn.
471-60-1688
✓ Dawson, Rhett
B 5/19
12-9-43
Ill.
351-34-4329
IL
DeMarco
DeMarco, James
B 6/26
3-12-43
W. Va.
286-36-9097
Dennin, Joseph Francis
*B 6/23
6-9-43
NY:
567-62-5353
4+
✓ DeOreo, Mary
B 6/26
6-13-47
Ohio
287-42-6258
✓ Di Genova, Joseph E.
B 6./26
2-22-45- Del.
222-28-5430
Dick, James
B 6/26
7-25-47.
Mass.
029-36-6745
Dillon, Molly.
Doolittle, Patricia
B 6/10
4-16-51
Va..
150-38-4588
08-12-43
NC
213-42-6360
Dwyer, Daniel
··8-24-52.
Ma.
023-44-8792
Elliff, John
Epstein, Michael Taylor.
Euno, Joan
·
B. 5/23
6-30-41
DC
345-34-2468
B 6/26
3-10-37
Mass..
1026-28-6318 ·
8-30-46
•
DC
215-46-2988
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 159

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_158.jpeg ---
IC STAFF VERIFICATION OF CLEARANCES
30 JUN 1975.
Staff Members of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activities who have received a security
investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation within the past five years and are certified as
meeting requirements of EO 10450 for access to classified information up to and including TOP SECRET.
Compartmented
Clearance
Date and
Place of Birth
Social
Security No.
L
116375-308
Name
Designated Briefed
"
(SI, TK, B)
aron, David
B 4/15
8-21-38
Ill.
550-44-7971',
Bader; William
Bayly, John
.B 4/17
9-8-31
NJ
545-30-3377
TF Badge
B 5/19.
1-26-44
DC.
578-60-2305
✓
•
Banoff, Barbara
B 6/26
12-20-45.
Cal.
561-68-9123
✓ Barkey, Howard
Baron, Frederick
✓ ✓ Kenz, Charity I.
B 6/2
1-26-17
"I
Mo.
490-01-6758
B 5/19.
12-2-47
Conn."
494-54-5241.
B 5/23
7-23-46'
NY.
053-38-7410
"
*Birdsell, Wayne
5-2-06
DC.
578-03-1841
Bouschard, Samuel-
B 6/10°
3-12-24
Maine
007-18-3292
Brissett, Belva
B 6/10
6-23-41
Ok.
440-44-6374.
Brooks, Nancy
B 5/23
2-14-40
Ky.
313-38-6773
Brown, C. Harold
6-6-38
Ohio:
278-34-3428..
'Brown, Maxine
B 6/26
.
8-8-28
'Ida.
568-40-3123
*
Carpenter, Margaret
NB 5/19
8-27-44
Cal.
555-62-6129
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 158
CELICE
GENIM NOLLY TV
MDRY6
REIN IS U....
DATE 4-29-2000 BY STRAU

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_160.jpeg ---
Name
Compartmented
Clearance
Designated Briefed
30 JUN 1975
Date and
Place of Birth
Social
Security No.
(SI, TK, B)
✓ Fenn, Peter
Ford, Harold
B 4/24
12-12-47
Ma.
213-50-1123 .
4
B 6/26
3-23-21
Cal.
550-16-4630
enstein, Mark Henry.
B 5/28.
3-7-46
Ala.
420-60-8767.”
✓ Greissing, Edward
11-27-50.
Germany
296-50-4113
✓ Harrigan, Arthur
.B 5/19'
3-16-44
NY
141-34-1031
1031
Hatry,
Hatry, Audrey Helen
.B 5/19
6-10-23
Md
216-14-8691
✓ Inderfurth, Mark K.
B 4/29
9-29-46.
NC
245-74-5617
TF Badge
"I
Iverson, Portia
10-22-50
W. Va.
233-84-0847
Jefferson,' Arthur M.
B 6/26
3-16-44
NY
* 141-34-1031
✓ Johnson, Dorothy
6-8-25
Or.
Johnson, Loch'
B 4/29
2-21-42
N. Zealand.
✓ Karalekas, Anne
B 5/28
11-6-46
Ma..
11
Kelley, Robert
B 5/19
10-29-40
Ind.
540-20-6413·
566-62-0478
023-36-4329.
559-54-1348
4
"I
Kieves, Lawrence
Kirbow, Charles
Kirchheimer, Joseph.
heim
k
·
.B 5/19
1-4-48
NY
068-38-6464
I
B 4/24
10-2-22
Ga.
252-12-5112.
TF Badge
6-3-17
Ill.
359-03-7843
NEW 88326 Docid:32989611. Page 160

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_16.jpeg ---
"
Intelligence Community Staff
SECRET
THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
WASHINGTON, 'D. C. 20505
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
0
Si
21
4
I
=
DCI/IC 75-036
2 July 1975
7
· See Distribution
·Update of Task Force Assignments
Memos dated 10 and 11 June on subject of
Task Force Assignments
"
1. Listed below are issues being addressed by Task Forces under
the direction of Mr. Wilderotter, with additional personnel assignments
as noted. This list supersedes the referenced memoranda.
Subject
Principal
Agency
Assassinations
White House
Drug Abuse
CIA
Political Abuses
(1964)
FBI
Domestic
Justice
Surveillance
ALLTED
1742:22.10-16-2000. Sezain pr
MDR-16
☐
Principal
Officer
Mr. Wilderotter
IDS 145-7094
Sayre Stevens
IDS 143-4303
Task Force
Assignments
James Gardner
State Dept.
IDS 101-29034
Malcolm Lawrence
State Dept.
IDS 101-28694
REC-84. 62-116-395-332
Hunter Helgeson
324-4885
(Green 5303)
John Martin
IDS 187-4555
JUL 62-116395 SECRET
NW 88326 buti
NW 88326 'Docid:32989611 Page 16
3 JUL 10 1975
VE
Charles Kane
CIA
IDS 143-6777
Verne St. Mars
State Dept.
IDS 101-29448
CLASSIFIED BY 006805
EXEMPT FROM. GENERAL DECLASSIFICATION
SCHEDULE OF E. 0. 11952, EXEMPTION CATEGORY!
§ 5£(1)(12), (3) or (4) (arcis one or more)
AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIED ON
Undetermined
(unless impossible, insert date or event)

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_162.jpeg ---
Name
"
Compartmented
Clearance
Designated Briefed
Date and
Place of Birth
Social
Security No.
30 JUN 1975
(SI, TK, B)
✓ ✓ ✓ Moore, Janet
B 5/23
4-9-43 : Iowa.
484-52-9820
✓ Murphy, Michael
O'Flaherty; James Daniel
Orloff, Jan.
✓ Owens, Drena
-
Peterson, John F.
✓ Pitts, Susan
10-13-54
Tex.
231-86-8829.
B4/15
11-4-42
Ill.
239-62-8495 Badge
'B 6/26
11-14-47
Cal.
558-74-8394
"
B 6/2
12-8-42
NC
242-68-3271"
"
B 6/26
6-15-41
* Cal.
565-56-7707
B 6/10
10-24-53
Canada
1020-40-7638
"
✓ Pyle, Christopher'
B 6/26
11-24-39
Mass..
019-30-9898
Quanbeck, Elton.
... B 5/19
•5-15-26'
N. Dak.
501-14-4534
Rhea, Gordon
B 6/26
3-10-45
Va.
Ricks, Walter
-
B 6/26
12-27-46
· Ga.
1.412-74-7901
244-74-4304
Romberg, Alan
✓ Rowe, James
Schneider, Ruth
Schwarz, Frederick A. `O. III
B 4/22
12-1-38
NY.
107-30-8583
B 5/19
6-6-51
DC
DC
579-62-6719
Seidel, Lester
*
+
B 5/23
B.4/15
.. B 6/26.
10-31-44.
Conn.
008-32-0180
•
4-20-35
NY
084-30-2047
7-17-44
DC
216-38-5204
n
16
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 162

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_161.jpeg ---
"I
Compartmented
Clearance
Name
Designated Briefed
Date and
Place of Birth
*
Social
Security No.
R
30 JUN 1975
11
(SI, TK, B.)
Koppal, Diane
✓✓ Voy, Diane
Liebengood, Howard.
B 6/26.
6-24-48
NC
219-48-0018
B 6/10
11-10-48
Venezuela
JFK Act 5 (g) (2) (D)
12-29-42
"
In.
307-44-9707+
Lombard, Charles
B 4/24
6-2-30
France
578-44-9471
Badge
✓ Lynch, Mary
3-16-26
W. Va.
250-38-1344
MacDonald, Naldeen
10-19-51
Brazil
225-78-8708
"
Madigan, Michael James
B 4/15
4-18-43
DC.
042-34-3797.
TF Badge
✓
Marshall, Benjamin'
B 4/17
5-4-19
NE
485-28-4503
✓ Marshall, Burke
-10-1-22
NJ
577-44-5241
Mascioli, Cynthia
B 6/26
1-4-51
NY
112-44-7636.
"
Mason, Judy
·´B 6/10
1-6-46.
DC
578-60-7280
Maxwell, Elliot Everett
· B 4/15.
7-24-46
NY.
133-34-4225
TF Badge
Mayo, Betty:
B 6/26
2-13-22
Ohio
277-14-4062
✓ Mecham, Martha Evans
B. 5/23
2-11-40
Cal.
528-48-6848
Miller, William G.
B 4/15
8-15-31
NY
109-26-4349
✓✓ Knaco, Patricia
KY (88226 Docid:32989611. Page 161
.B 5/23
10-17-35
NJ
: 157-26-8100'
6

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_163.jpeg ---
Name
Compartmented
Clearance
Designated Briefed
(SI, TK, B)
Date and
Place of Birth.
Social
Security No.
30 JUN 1975
"I
Shea, Patrick
B 4/15
2-28-48
Utah
528-64-1965.
Shelburn, Frank
Shelburn,
5-30-13
¡va. ..
338-24-6934.
Smith, Elizabeth.
B. 5/19
6-21-49
NY
076-42-0199
Smith, John L.
B 6/26
3-3-39'
Ky.
400-52-5800
✓ Smith, Stephanie
3-23-54
Ohio
282-58-6476
Smothers, Curtis'
B 5/16
8-26-43
Md..
220-38-9869 Badge
Snider, Lewis Brittle
B 4/24
1-12-45.
NC
246-72-0956
Talley, Martha
B 6/26
9-7-50
NC
245-88-1368
Thoben, Florence
6-2-10.
Ind.
313-12-1857
Thomas, Robert.
✓ Towell, Mary
Treverton, Gregory
✓ Trueheart, William
Ischirgi, James.
Wallach, Paul
Ward, Fred
A
NW 88326. Docid:32989611 Page 163
12-16-25: Md.
219-14-5186
B 6/10:
4-25-44
Tenn.
566-64-7628
*
B 672
1-21-47
Colo.
524-62-2459
. B 6/2
12-18-18
Va.
225-20-6411
B 6/26
2-23-25 . Wyo.
B 6/26
5-24-47
NY
11-20-40 DC
520-16-7290
149-36-2999
| 225-50-9983
B
%3
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_164.jpeg ---
Name
☑
Compartmented
Clearance
Designated Briefed
Date and
Place of Birth
Social
Security No.
30 JUN 197
(SI,TK, B)
Wides, Burton. Victor
Wiik, Carol Ann
B 4/17
6-14-41 NJ
139-30-1936
TF Badge
B 5/23
4-21-51
Mass',
017-40-7170
✓
Wilson, Otis:
B 6/10
5-16-20 Va.
557-14-5461
* Zimmerman, Peter Brown
already briefed
✓✓ Zimmerman, Phebe
3-26-46
12-1-50
Ill.
227-60-1093
Ohio
271-54-1724
NW 88326 Docld: 32989611 Page 164

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_165.jpeg ---
NR 016 NK PLAIN
7:09PM 6/25/75 NITEL RXG
TO
DIRECTOR, FBI (62-116395)
FROM SAC, NEWARK (66-3971)
JU..
An IS
“SENSTUDY, 75)
RE NKTELETYPE 6/5/75 CAPTIONED AS ABOVE AND TELCALL, BUREAU
SUPERVISOR SEYMOUR PHILLIPS TO ASAC JOHN J. SCHWARTZ, 6/25/75
IN RESPECT TO FBIHQ'S INQUIRY FOR A MEMORANDUM FROM FORMER
SA LEO T. CLARK TO SAC OR ASAC, NEWARK, DURING JULY AND AUGUST,
1964, WHICH ALLEGEDLY WAS CONTAINED IN NK FILE 62-109276.
NEWARK DETERMINED THAT FILE NO. 62-109276 IS THE BUREAU
FILE NUMBER PERTAINING TO PROTECTION OF THE PRESIDENT. FURTHER
EFFORT TO LOCATE FORMER SA CLARK'S MEMORANDUM IN NEWARK FILE
157-1602 PERTAINING TO RACIAL DEMONSTRATIONS, DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL CONVENTION, ATLANTIC CITY, N. J., 8/24-27/64%;B (RM)%;
WERE NEGATIVE.
END
PLS
HOLD
2-1097-76/Bec
Pursuant to veloiguwen if his lifest
JUL.3. 1975,
Clavk
777
to
NR fill as climit) Nui 181-160
Memos x
NW 88328 Docld: 32989611 Page 165
Clam
5-
REC-102
H
ALL INFORMATION COATE
HEREIN IS UNCLASS
DATE 9-58-500U BY SAZAL
MDR-16
62-116395-307
3 JUL 2 1975
Records
Place in 2-116395
**
Assoc. Dir.
Dep.-A.D.-Adm.
Dep.-A.D.-Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell. Lokw/pe
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_167.jpeg ---
1
1
The Honorable Edward H. Levi
Page Two
June 23, 1975
The Committee has authorized the staff to con-
duct an investigation of matters pertaining to the
above-named informant. Preparations will be made to
interview the above-named employees in St. Paul and Des
Moines. Liaison officials at the Bureau and the Depart-
ment of Justice will be contacted shortly by Patrick
Shea of the Select Committee staff with regard to the
details of these interviews.
This investigation may involve specific allega-
tions of abuse or other controversial matters where
there is reason to believe improprieties may have occur-
red. It is not anticipated that these interviews will
be monitored by the Bureau or the Department of Justice,
as they will relate to alleged abuses falling within the
mandate of the Committee pursuant to Senate Resolution 21.
Sincerely
#troms
Frank Church
Chairman
hurch
Cc:
William O'Connor
Paul Daley
1
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 167

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_169.jpeg ---
-
Low
SECRET
SECRE
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: SENSTUDY 75
62-116395
Subject
Principal Agency
TF Leader
Watch list
DOD
Domestic
surveillance
F
Justice
FBI Representatives
Benson Buffham R. L. Shackelford
(NSA) 688-7222
John Martin
J. G. Deegan
IDS 187-4555
To date, "Notices" from the SSC specifically
defining the areas to be covered under above topics, have
not been received. They are to be sent to the TF leaders
who will then contact our representatives as needed. Attached
for the information of each of the above designees are single
copies of aforementioned 6/17/75 memorandum, explaining the
TFs, and ICS memorandum 6/10/75 showing TF assignments as of
that date.
ACTION:
With your approval, the ICS Steering Group will
be informed that the aforementioned FBI personnel have been
designated to assist in the listed TFs.
JPT
Euf
1/77
NAMES AND BUREAU
PHONE NUMBERS FORNEHED
•TO WAS. PERRY HILLS, IC STAFF
443.
6/30/75. LFS
oky
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 169
Pum
gd
SECRET
2
Isa
SECRE
whe

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_166.jpeg ---
FBT
FRANK CHUNGIL, IDAHO, SHÁIRMAY
JOHN G. TOWER, TEXAS, VICE CHAIRI
PHILIP A. HART, MICH.
VALTER F. MONDALE, MINN.
WALTER D. HUDDLESTON, KY,
RODENT MORGAN, N.C.
GARY HART, COLO.
HOWARD H. DAKE)) )., TENN.
DARRY GOLDWATER, JAZ
CHARLES MC C. MATHIAS, JR., MD.
RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, PA.
10D 2
WILLIAM G. MILLER, staff DIRECTOR
FREDERICK A. O. SCHWARZ, JR., CHIEF COUNSEL
CURTIS R. SMOTHERS, MINORITY COUNSEL
#C307
#
i
Ilnited States Senate
SELECT COMMITTEE TO
Jul 26 10 4 STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
DEPT. OF JUSTICE
MAIL ROOM
ORGH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
(PURSUANT TO S. RES. 21, 94TH CONGRESS)
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20510
10
The Honorable Edward H. Levi.
The Attorney General
Washington, D. C. 20530
June 23, 1975
1
2.94
Dear Mr. Attorney General; Senstudly
.75
-
Presul my
dated
Estupe
The Select Committee proposes to interview the
following employees of the Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion and the Department of Justice with respect to the
case of Douglas Durham, an informant employed by the
Bureau prior to March 1975:
ALL INFORMATION CONTAI
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-28-2000
MDR-16
Joseph L. Hearsley
F.B.I.
John McFee
F.B.I.
Des Moines, Iowa
Omaha, Nebraska
Des Moines, Iowa
David Hedgecock
F.B.I.
REC- 102
Larry L. Astoki
F:B.I.
111
Iss
8.4.
2
RECEIVED
JUN 27 19/5
6
KWOC
381975
Robert Taubert
F.B.I.
Ray Williams
F.B.I.
Douglas Hofer
F.B.I.
R. D. Hurd
U. S. Attorney
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 166
62-116395-306
Des Moines, Iowa
"
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
3 JUL 2 1975
St. Paul, Minnesota
********FED.
FED. BU
St. Paul, Minnesota C
JHU OR 1975
St. Paul, Minnesota
5.8
134
RAD
OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
FED. BUC
fale 62-116325

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_168.jpeg ---
TO
FROM
P
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
: Mr. W. R. Wannall
Woc
W. O. Cregar
0
SUBJECT: SENSTUDY 75
"I
MDR-16
DECLASSIDIED BY
SECRET
ECRET
72
Mr. J. B. Adams
Mr. J. A. Mintz
J. B. Hotis)
(1
DATE: 6/23/75
1
-
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 Mr. W. A. Branigan
RECX102
1
Mr.
J. G. Deegan
1
1
1
Mr. J. W. Dalseg
1
Mr. J. P. Lee
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. Aby
Asst. Dire
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Infol
Mr. R. L. Shackelford Laboratory
Mr. W. O. Cregar
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
Fur
-
-
-
1 – Mr. J. P. Thomas
This is to record assignments of FBI representatives
to coordinate with Intelligence Community Staff (ICS) Task
Force (TF) leaders on ICS TFs for which FBI does not have
primary responsibility.
My memorandum to you 6/17/75 reported upon a
6/13/75 meeting chaired by Mr. James Wilderotter, Associate
Counsel to the President, to discuss the functions of TFS
in connection with investigation of the intelligence community
by the Senate Select Committee (SSC). An enclosure to that
memorandum listed the various TFs and indicated those regarding
which the FBI was expected to be involved with. We were asked
to designate a specific individual who would coordinate with
the TF leader of TFs which were not assigned to FEI represen÷
tatives. The following designations are proposed
Subject
Principal Agency
Justice
Electronic
surveillance
and warrantless
wiretap
Use of proprietary CIA UY
organizations
FBI Representatives
TF Leader
George
Calhoun
J. W. Dalseg
IDS 187-4401:
Erich
W. A. Branigan
Isenstead
Green 3140
REC.
Mail cover and
Justice
intercept
Phil White
IDS 187-4674
62-116395-305
J. P. Lee
?
5 JU
62-116395
JPT:bkbb RD
(12)
MD
88326
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN
HERRIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-16-20 BY SRZACAR
CONTINUED - OVER
SECRET SECRET
Classified by 6875
P
Exempt from GDS, Category Number 2
Date of Declassification Indefinite
NW 88326 Decld:32989611 Page 168
200
FIVE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_17.jpeg ---
=
Subject
. Domestic
Surveillance (Contd)
Electronic
and Warrantless
Surveillance
Wiretap
SECRET
Principal
Agency
Principal
Officer
Task Force
Assignments
George Calhoun
Justice
IDS 187-4401
J. G. Deegan
FBI
324-4646
William Jones
State Dept.
IDS 101-20370
J. W. Dalseg
FBI
324-4713
Use of National
Organizations
FBI
John Thomas
324-4609
Use of Proprietary CIA
· Organizations
Erich Isenstead
Green 3140
Phil White
Mail Cover and
Intercept
Justice.
IDS 187-4674
Watch List
DoD
·Benson Buffham
NSA
Lee Peters
State Dept.
IDS 101-29403
W. A. Branigan
FBI
324-4550
J. P. Lee
FBI
324-4562
Ernest Tsikerdanos
CIA
IDS 143-6348
R. L. Shackelford
FBI
324-4594.
Army
Surveillance
1
DoD
2
688-7222
Dr. David Cooke
695-4436
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 17
SECRET

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_170.jpeg ---
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
O
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES.
2 - J. A. Mintz
(1 J. B. Hotis)
1 - W. R. Wannall
June 23, 1975
1 - W. O. Cregar
1 - T. E. Burns
1 - D. Ryan
Reference is made to memorandum from Senate Select
Committee, dated May 14, 1975, and appendices thereto, requesting
certain documents and other information from the FBI.
Attached for your approval and forwarding to the
Committee is the original of a memorandum which is responsive to
one of the Committee's requests.
records.
A copy of the memorandum is being provided for your
Enclosures (2)
62-116395
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS
YASSIFIED,
DATE 9-28-2000 BY 512
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for
DR:pld
(10)
8/main
d
JAM
w/
édm
MD-16
Intelligence Coordination
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.\\\
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
-
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
✓ Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Diretor Secy
MALL ROOM
NW88326 boeld:32989611 Påge 170
EU
REC-102
TELETYPE UNIT
hand and 6-23-75
62-116895
Ini
PVD/R
304
3 JUL 2 1978
C
PLM
DR
GPO 954-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_173.jpeg ---
**
5-140 (Rev. 1-21-74) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20535
Addressee: Senate Select Committee
☐
☐ LTR
1
☑LHM ☐ Memo ☐ Report dated 6-23-75
U.S. Senate Select Committee Re:
DOCUMENTS PERTAINING TO THE "HUSTON
PLAN, "COINTELPRO, AND OTHER PRACTICES
AND PROGRAMS; COINTELPRO
Originating Office Appendix C, Part II, Item 20
Delivered by:
Richard
FBI
Date:
6/25/75
Received by: a B. Mara (c)
Title:
Return this receipt to the Intelligence Division, FBI
NW 88326 Docld:32989611-Page-173-
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINE
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIF
DATE 9-28-2000 BY SPA
MDR-16
}

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_174.jpeg ---
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
TO: Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
FROM:
FBI
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
2. DATE PROVIDED
1. HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
K
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY | OTHER
•
K
TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
SSC
6/23/75
HSC
4. IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name or identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Memorandum
5.
IN RESPONSE TO (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
SSC letter 5/14/75, Appendix C, Part II, Item #20,
requested information as to COINTELPRO (Counterintel-
ligence Program) activities.
U
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
Counterintelligence
Intelligence activities, foreign
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
Memorandum discussed the various COINTELPROS, their discontinuance
and how counterintelligence activities in the foreign field are
sometimes carried out in individual cases rather than through a
formalized program.
62-116395
SFP:1hb
(4)
ALL IMPORTATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNGLASSINY D
DATE BY SPEALM/BP
TADR-16
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75. LFS
7-2-75
3791 (6.75)
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 174
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_175.jpeg ---
L
'
INSTRUCTIONS
Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
"FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
-
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewėe is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required.
pages may be attached if necessary.
Additional
;
;
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 175
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_172.jpeg ---
Documents Pertaining to the "Huston Plan, "
Cointelpro, and Other Practices and Programs
A review of all of our files which have been referred
to as Cointelpro files revealed no Cointelpro-type activity since
April 28, 1971.
In foreign counterintelligence operations the objectives
are detection, penetration and, finally, neutralization of intelligence
operations directed against the United States by foreign intelligence
services or other hostile elements. Various neutralizing techniques
are employed against such services and elements, their officers and
their agents in the United States. Among these are double agent
operations, disruption, disinformation, penetrations, recruitments,
persona non grata action, visa denial and, in rare instances when
conditions allow, prosecution. Thus, it can be seen that so-called
"Cointelpre-type" techniques are, and always have been, an integral
part of our foreign counterintelligence efforts, whether they were
practiced in individual cases or under the aegis of a formalized programs.
This is a critical distinction to be made between our foreign counter-
intelligence operations and operations conducted in the domestic security o
field.
In an effort to comply fully with the request to provide
a list of any Cointelpro type activities engaged in subsequent to April 28,
1971, in addition to the review of Cointelpro files noted above, personnel
of the Intelligence Division were contacted during the week of June 2-6,
1975, to determine if any had knowledge of any such actions. Excepting
foreign counterintelligence operations, the results of this inquiry were
negative.
NOTE:
"
See letter to the Attorney General, dated 6/23/75, captioned
"United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activities,
prepared by DR:pld.
It is noted in one instance one individual alluded to the
TARPRO disinformation-type operation which has been directed against
the Soviet intelligence service as being of a Cointelpro character. It is
not believed this latter technique constitutes the type of information sought
by the Committee.
-2-
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 172
i
"
1
:

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_171.jpeg ---
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
-
62-116395
2 - J. A. Mintz
(1 - J. B. Hotis)
1 - W. R. Wannall
1 - W. O. Cregar
1 - T. E. Burns
June 23, 1975
1 - D. Ryan
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
TO STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS
WITH RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: DOCUMENTS PERTAINING TO THE
"HUSTON PLAN," COINTELPRO, AND
OTHER PRACTICES AND PROGRAMS
COINTELPRO
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-28-300 BY SPAC
Reference is made to memorandum from captioned
Committee dated May 14, 1975, and the appendices thereto, which
contained requests for information from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI). Item 20, Part II, Appendix C, requested a list
of any Cointelpro-type activities, as defined in the prepared statement
of Attorney General Saxbe before the House Judiciary Committee on
November 20, 1974, which were engaged in by the FBI subsequent to
April 28, 1971, be provided.
In response to this request, it is noted all Counter-
intelligence Programs (Cointelpros) were discontinued by FBI
Headquarters airtel to Albany, with copies to all field offices, dated
April 28, 1971. Specifically, this communication listed seven Cointelpros.
In addition to the seven mentioned in the April 28, 1971, airtel,
subsequent reviews at FBI Headquarters disclosed five additional
Cointelpros. In this context, it should be noted several of the 12
Cointelpro operations related to FBI activities in the foreign counter-
intelligence field.
FBI Headquarters airtel April 28, 1971, discontinuing
the Cointelpros noted as follows, "In exceptional instances where it is
considered counterintelligence action is warranted, recommendations
should be submitted to the Bureau under the individual case caption to
which it pertains. These recommendations will be considered on an
individual basis. "
1 - The Attorney General
DR:pld
Telephone Rm. (9)
Director Sec'y
MAIL ROOM
Ina
ORIGINAL AND ONE COPY TO AG-
TELETYPE UNIT
NM 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 171
Like
PLM
See NOTE page 2.
JENCLOSURE 17 116375.304
62
Jua
OR
GPO 954-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_178.jpeg ---
t
(
Further Documents Pertaining
to the FBI and Department of Justice
Policies and Procedures
NOTE:
The SSC had originally requested access to all double
zero files, however, this request was modified by them during
a conference with our representatives 5/30/75, wherein agreement
was reached to provide SSC only pertinent memoranda and other
representative communications from the 100-00 file.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 178
1
1
E
- 2 -
'
||

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_177.jpeg ---
||
62-116395
2 - Mr.
(1
« Mintz
Mr. J. B. Hotis)
1 Mr. W. R. Wannall
1
1
-
-
-
Mr. W. O. Cregar
Mr. T. E. Burns
June 23, 1975
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
IO STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS
WITH RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
RE: FURTHER DOCUMENTS PERTAINING TO
THE FBI AND DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
nis
Assoc. Dir.
Reference is made to letter dated May 14, 1975, with
attached appendices requesting certain documents and other infor-
nation from the FBI.
Item number 3., Part I, Appendix B of referenced
communication requested all general policy memoranda and other
materials not already provided the Committee pertaining to
internal security, intelligence collection, and/or counter-
intelligence matters, operations, and activities for the period
1960 to the present.
The above request has already been satisfied by our
previous response to other requests contained in the referenced
letter and its appendices. We are making specific reference to
those responses which furnished the Committee access to the
Ilanual of Rules and Regulations, the Manual of Instructions,
the SAC Letters and Memoranda covering the period from 1960 to
the present, and pertinent policy memoranda and other repre-
sentative communications culled from the 100-00 File.
1 The Attorney General
Dep. AD Adm. - TEB : jmn jmn
(8)
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
-
-
-
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval. _
Spec. Inv. _
Training
-
ORIGINAL AND ONE TO AG
*FORMATION CONTAL
IN IS UNCLASSIFIED
A 9-28-20 BY SZALM
MDR-16
SEE NOTE PAGE 2
WRW
Pum
Wo
gam
TVM
Legal Coun. _
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
1
-
MAIL ROOM
TELETYPE UNIT
%2
INCLOSURE
110:15-303
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 177
GPO: 1975 O - 56

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_176.jpeg ---
|
f
The Attorney General
Director, FBI
15
☺
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
2
1
1
1
-
11 1
J. A. Mintz
Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. Q. Cregar
Mr. T. E. Burns
June 23, 1975
I
42-83
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
-
By letter dated May 14, 1975, with attached appendices
the SSC requested certain information and documents from the FBI.
Enclosed for your approval and forwarding to the
Committee is the original of a memorandum responding to one of
the Committee's requests.
records.
A copy of this memorandum is being furnished for your
Enclosures (2)
62-116395
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. William O'Connor
TEB: jmn jmn
(9)
-
ENCLOSURE
wrw/8
com
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec⭑y
MAILEROOM
1975
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
REC-102 62-116395-303 FVD/...\.
ST.T. TITFORMATION CONTAINED
> F
_ IS UNCLASSIFIED
9-28-2000 FX SPALM/188
MDR-16
TELETYPE UNIT
NW 88326" Docid:32989611 Page 176
224
3 JUL 2 1975
Pun
11/25/75
To Noda & Alic done!
Jam
5-TIM
GPO 1975 O - 569-920

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_179.jpeg ---
.J
:
'
Y
$
5-140 (Rev. 1-21-74) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20535
* Addressee: Senate Select Committee
☐ LTR ☑LHM ☐ Memo ☐ Report dated 6-23-75
U.S. Senate Select Committee Re:
FURTHER VOCUMENTS PERTAINING TO THE FBI
AND DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES
Originating Office Appendix B, Part J., Item 3
Delivered by: Richard Taylor, fr
Received by:
Return
Title:
Return this receipt to the Intelligence Division, FBI
Date:
FBI
6/25/75 1/1/071
Cr
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 179
I OG ÖSPORTCATION CONTAINED
L
13
AREA IS UNCLASSIFIED
BATH 9-38-2000 BY
MDR-16
SPALM B
1
L

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_18.jpeg ---
SECRET
2. The following officers from the Department of State have been
named to assist in the CIA preparation of comprehensive papers on the
following geographic and subject areas:
Greece
· Dominican Republic
Laos
James Gardner
IDS 101-29034
James Gardner
IDS 101-29034
James Henderson
East Asia Bureau
The Congo
Indonesia
Katzenbach Report
Bayard King
IDS 101-21504
Patricia Barnett
IDS 101-22369
Emerson Brown
IDS 101-21504
cc: Mr. Buchen
Mr. Hills
Distribution:
1 Mr. Wilderotter
1
-
-
Mr. Latimer
=
Harriet Thawat
Harriett Mowitt
Executive Secretary
USIB Ad Hoc Coordinating Group
1
-
Mr. Hyland
1
Mr. Morell
1
-
Mr. O'Connor
1 - Mr. Cregar &
1 - Mr. Knoche
1 - Mr. Clarke
3
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 18
SECRET
11
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_182.jpeg ---
The Attorney General
2
1
1
MOST
I I
Mr.
(1
J. A. Mintz
Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. O. Cregar
June 20, 1975
L
Director, FBI
1
Mr. T. J. Deakin
1
Mr. T. E. Burns
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
By letter dated May 14, 1975, with attached
appendices, the SSC requested cortain information and
documents from the FBI.
Enclosed for your approval and forwarding to
tho Committee are the original of a memorandum and a copy
of each of the documents described in such remorandum.
A copy of this memorandum with enclosures is
being furnished for your records.
Enclosures 18
62-110395
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. Willian O'Connor
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
TEB:dmt
(10)
18
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm
Dep. AD Inv.
sst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
firs
Viles &
Gen. In
Ident.
Inspes
¡Com.
Int
tion
"
|
M
ENCLOSURE
ALLIC MATION CONT
REC-102
0
ACTRESS UNC ASSITES ALL
DATE 9-28-2000 B.Y
ND R-16
-
tory
Eval.
447
TELETYPE UNIT
MAI1975M
NM 88026 [cld:32989611 Page 182
STID
10/23/15 AND
6/25/75 Nodean MacDonald, AFT
62-116395-302
-302-0
In
fa
S
| ! Chr. - 4063 Ast

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_180.jpeg ---
3.
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
31
TO: Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
FROM:
FBI
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
2. DATE PROVIDED
1. HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
X
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY
OTHER
.
☑
TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
SSC
6/23/75
4.
HSC
IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name or identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Memorandum
5. IN RESPONSE TO (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
SSC letter 5/14/75, Appendix B, Part I, Item #3,
requested general policy communications in the
security field
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
U
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
Policies and procedures
Intelligence collection
Operating procedures
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
LL
Response memorandum noted that the request had already been
satisfied by previous responses to other requests in the same
5/14/75 SSC letter and appendices.
62-116395
SFP:1hb
(4)
NATION CONTAINED
INI UNCLASSIFIED
1119-28-2000 BY
MDR-16
BALM/AD
TREAT AS YELLOW
uoc
5.
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75. LFS
7-2-75
3791 (6-75)
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 180
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_181.jpeg ---
INSTRUCTIONS
Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
"FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
+
-
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewee is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required. Additional
› pages may be attached if necessary.
=
7
it
$
"
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 181
"
U

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_184.jpeg ---
*
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
TO STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES .
i
5) T. J. Smith memorandum to E. S. Miller captioned
"FBI Intelligence Letter for the President Code Name 'Inlet'
Research Matter, " dated February 2, 1973.
Enclosures - 8
1 - The Attorney General
NOTE:
See W. O. Cregar memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall 6/18/75 cap-
tioned "SENSTUDY." The above material which we are furnishing to the
Committee was supplied by SA Thomas J. Deakin, Central Research
Unit, IS - 3 Section, INTD, who located the documents and
provided sanitized Xerox copies, deleting administrative
material.
.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 184

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_183.jpeg ---
62-116395
100
**
2 - Mr. J. A. Mintz
(1 – Mr. J. B. Hotis)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. O. Cregar
Mr. T. J. Deakin
Mr. T. E. Burns
June 20, 1975
UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
TO STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
RE: DOCUMENTS PERTAINING TO THE "HUSTON
PLAN,” COINTELPRO, AND OTHER PRACTICES
AND PROGRAMS
OTHER SPECIFIC FBI PRACTICES AND PROGRAMS
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident:
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
1
Reference is made to SSC letter to The Attorney
General dated May 14, 1975, with attached appendices, requesting
certain documents and other information from the FBI.
Pursuant to your request in Appendix C, Part III,
Item 29, for all memoranda and other materials pertaining to
the origina, implementation, and termination of Project
INLET, involving preparation of an Intelligence Letter for
the President, enclosed are copies of the following documents:
1) B. C. Sullivan memorandum to C. D. DeLoach
captioned "EBI Intelligence letter for the President,” dated
November 7, 1969, with enclosed letters to the President and
The Attorney General.
2) W. C. Sullivan memorandum to C. D. Delonch captioned
"FBI Intelligence Letter for the President," dated November 20,
1969, with enclosed letter to all field offices, captioned
"FBI Intelligence Letter for the President Code Name 'Inlet'
Research-Satellite Matter," dated November 26, 1969.
3) R. D. Cotter memorandum to W. C. Sullivan
captioned "FBI Intelligence Letter for the President" dated
April 23, 1970.
4) Letter from the Acting Director to all field
offices captioned "FBI Intelligence Letter for the President
Code Name 'Inlet' Research Matter," dated December 26, 1972.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINE
TEB:dmt
(9)
don't
KB
MAIL ROOM
p
HEREIN IS UNCLAGOIDED
DATE 9-28-2010 33% SZALA
MDR-16
TELETYPE UNIT
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 183
12-110
ENCLOSURE
☐ ☐
PLM
8-302
Tami
GPO 954-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_185.jpeg ---
5-140 (Rev. 1-21-74) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Addressee:
✓ LTR
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20535
Semate Select Committee
☑ LHM ☐ Memo ☐ Report dated 6/20/75
U.S. Senate Select Committee. Re: Documents
Caption of Document: Pertaining to the "Huston Plan,"
Cointelpro, and other practices and programs;
Other Specific FBI Practices and Programs.
Part III, 29
28
Office:
Delivered by Richard Taylor Jr.
Date:
FBI
6/25/75/4/17
Deceived by: Boxed (Clark)
Title:
Return this receipt to the Intelligence Division, FBI
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 185
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN
HEREIN IS UNCLAS
DATE 9-28-2000 DYSPRAUM/pamp
MDR-16

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_186.jpeg ---
*
TO:
OTE:
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
FROM:
FBI
Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
2. DATE PROVIDED
•
HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available,
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
X
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY | OTHER
3. TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
X SSC
6/20/75
A.
HSC
IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name or identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Memorandum enclosing a number of FBI communications
5.
IN RESPONSE TO (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
SSC letter 5/14/75, Appendix C, Part III, Item #29,
requested FBI communications regarding Project INLET
(Intelligence Letter for the President).
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
U
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
Intelligence Collection
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
Material furnished SSC covered the origins, implementation and
termination of Project.
62-116395
SFP: 1hb
(4)
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-28-200 BY SPRALM/BAP
MDR-16
TREAT AS YELLOW
5
W
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75. LFS 7-2-75
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
3791 (6-75)
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 186
[

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_187.jpeg ---
L
INSTRUCTIONS
• Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
"FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
-
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewee is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required. Additional
pages may be attached if necessary.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 187

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_189.jpeg ---
SAC, Albany
For the Acting Director, FBI (65-73208)
W. Mark Felt
Acting Associate Director
FBI INTELLIGENCE LETTER
FOR THE PRESIDENT
CODE NAME INLET"
RESEARCH MATTER
ReBulet 11/26/69.
12/26/72
Referenced letter instructed all field offices to furnish
the Bureau hign-level intelligence data in the security field which
was to be furnished to the President and the Attorney General on a
continuing basis. All such communications were to be flagged with
the code name "Inlet" in the caption.
Since the inception of this program an evolution in policies
and practices has occurred and, currently, the information specified
in referenced letter is furnished by each field office in form suitable
for teletype dissemination to The White House and the Attorney General
as well as other interested agencies of the Government. Accordingly,
the "Inlet" program hasy for all practical purposes, been rendered .
obsolete and the Bureau is now formally rescinding instructions set
forth in referenced letter. .
The termination of the 'Inlet" program does not relieve
the responsibility of all offices to be alert for the intelligence data
specified in referenced letter and to submit this information in a
timely manner by teletype and in a form suitablé Tornissentination.
2 - All Field Offices
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINLIC
RMIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
EARLL
-
Sas DY MALM/BMP
MDR-16
• NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 189
:
$
---

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_19.jpeg ---
"OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
3 - Mr. J. A. Mintz
TO
Mr. W. R. Wannall
DATE:
Woo
FROM
W. O. Cregar
SUBJECT
SENSTUDY 75
(1. Mr. J. B.
-
-
Mr. P. V.
(1
7/2/75
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Arm?,
Dep. AD
Asst. Dir.:
Hotis) Admin.
Daly)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. S. F. Phillips
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSLIED
DATE: 10-16-2000 BYSRAUM/B
MORY6
•
Catfisht
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
URINTE
Laboratory
Legal Coun
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
This morning (7/2/75) Michael Epstein, Senate
Select Committee (SSC) Staff Member, advised SA Paul V. Daly,
Legal Counsel Division, that he, Epstein, is to interview
SA John R. Borys and former Assistant Director Ivan Conrad
at 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., respectively, Monday, 7/7/75.
Borys is assigned to WFO and Conrad resides 1307 Capulet
Court, McLean, Virginia 22101, unlisted telephone number
356-7590. Interviews are to concern the former FBI
investigation of Martin Luther King, Jr.
These are the latest in a series of interviews
regarding the King case being conducted by the SSC Staff of
present and former SAs. It is believed that Borys and
Conrad should be released from their secrecy agreements to
enable them to be interviewed which is the same procedure
which we have been taking with the others who have been
interviewed. The release from the agreement which we'are
recommending will, of course, be conditional that the interview
relate only to the King matter.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
REC-84
62-116395-
33
1. Borys and Conrad be released from their
secrecy agreement in order to be interviewed, but only
relating to the King case. On approval, Legal Counsel Division
will advise them of the release and invite them to consult
with the Legal Counsel Division early a.m. 7/7/75 in
preparation for the interviews.
-
1
-
62-116395
d67
675
->
1 67-
SFP: 1hbhb
1
"
3 JUL 10 1975
(Personnel File SA John R. Borys)
(Personnel File Former Assistant Director Ivan Conrad)
(9)
N
JUL 17 1975
Docid:32989611 Page 19
CONTINUED
-
OVER
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_191.jpeg ---
*********
*
4
4
MA YALAMAN LAURASA ZELENJOY THREE PARTIET W POND THE
emilusalınacak
Memorandum to Mr. E. S. Miller
Re: FBI Intelligence Letter for the President Code Name "INLET"
The FBI had, through several Administrations, furnished
various Presidents and Attorneys General important intelligence matters
on an individual basis. The Intelligence Letter served to consolidate this
information into one document. By August, 1970, changes in our commun-
ications capability, including the ability to afford immediate teletype
dissemination of intelligence data to The White House and the development
of other reporting procedures such as the Summary of Extremist Activities,
made the Intelligence Letter no longer necessary. Items submitted for this
Letter by the field were disseminated in these other ways. In December,
1972, the use of the code word "INLET" was discontinued and field offices
so advised. The field was also advised, however, they had the responsi-
bility to be alert for this type intelligence data.
ACTION:
For information.
HE
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 191
:

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_192.jpeg ---
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1967 EDIition
OSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
3010-104
UNITED STATES GOV RNMENT
Memorandum
TO
:
Mr. DeLoach
i
FROM: W. C. Sullivan
SUBJECT: FBI INTELLIGENCE LETTER
FOR THE PRESIDENT
· DATE: 11/20/69
I❘
This is to recommend that attached letter be
approved for sending to all field offices to advise them
of the initiation of captioned intelligence letter and to
furnish them instructions for the submission of material
suitable for use in this letter. Transmission of captioned
letter to the President on a continuing basis has been
approved in accordance with the Director's instructions to
keep the President fully informed of significant intelligence
developments within the purview of the Bureau's security
responsibilities.
RECOMMENDATION:
That the attached letter be approved for field-
wide dissemination. If approved, this memorandum should
be returned to the Research-Satellite Section, Domestic
Intelligence Division, for further processing of enclosure.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 01-28-3000
• MDR 76
BY S
m/pp.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 192
F
24
+ "

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_188.jpeg ---
"
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
OSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
To
:Mr. W. C. Sullivan
FROM :R. D. Cotter
DATE:
4/23/70
SUBJECT: FBI INTELLIGENCE LETTER FOR THE PRESIDENT
:
This memorandum recommends that we extend our dissemination
of the FBI Intelligence Letter (Inlet) to include Vice President Agnew.
Inlet is outgrowth of Director's personal suggestion for a
channel of high-level intelligence directly to the President. It has provided
medium for furnishing President sensitive and top-level data in which he
would have direct interest and has been disseminated only to President and
Attorney General. Since first Inlet issued 11/7/69, we have prepared
36 issues which have summarized 120 individual items of significance
on a wide range of topics, including racial violence, New Left intrigue,
Soviet and communist bloc espionage, and important foreign intelligence
data. Material is presented in a one-page format tailored to the President's.
convenience.
Vice President Agnew in recent conversations with the Director
has indicated a keen interest in the information the Bureau has been furnishing
him in recent months regarding domestic and foreign subversion. It is
obvious the Vice President is relying on the Bureau as a key source of
information. In view of Mr. Agnew's vital interest in these matters and
the high position he occupies, it is believed we should at this time include
him in dissemination to Inlet.
ACTION:
If the Director approves, the Vice President will be included
in future dissemination of this material.
:
1
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 188
ALL INFORMATION CONTAIN 10
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-28-2000 BY
MDR-16
AL/B
:

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_190.jpeg ---
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION:
·OSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
J-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
>
Mr. E. S. Miller
OM: T. J. Smith
DATE:
2/2/73
2174 k
TA
M
BJECT: FBI INTELLIGENCE LETTER FOR
THE PRESIDENT, CODE NAME 'INLET“
RESEARCH MATTER
ALL INFORM CON
DATE #1-18-2000 BY SPRAUM/18
mik
The FBI Intelligence Letter for the President was instituted
in November, 1969, pursuant to then FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover's
instructions to keep the President fully informed of significant intelligence
developments within the purview of the Bureau's security responsibilities.
Dissemination was restricted to the President, the Attorney General, and
later, the Vice President.
By letter dated November 26, 1969, all FBI field offices were
advised to flag information obtained in our investigations important enough
for the President's interest with the code word "INLET." This was to
include:
1) Information of national or international significance which
is security related.
2) Important current or pending developments in major
security cases.
3) Current information which is representative of or calls
attention to a significant developing intelligence trend.
4) Material which has a bearing on national security,
particularly that from sensitive and/or penetrative coverage of foreign
establishments, which could affect American relations with foreign
countries, or assist in formulating United States policy.
• 5 FEB 16 1973
5) "Inside" information concerning demonstrations, disorders,
or other civil disruptions which is of more than local significance.
6) Items with an unusual twist or concerning prominent
personalities which may be of special interest to the President or the
Attorney General.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 190
2
-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_193.jpeg ---
h
"
SAC, Albany
Director, FB1
FBI, INTELLIGENCE LETTER
FOR THE PRESIDENT
November 26, 1969
**
*
CODE NAME INLETO
RESEARCH-SATELLITE MATTER
ALL INFORMATIONT CONTAINED
ISUL CLASSIFIED
DATE 4-28-2000 BY SPAC
MDR-16
Captioned letter has been initiated at the Bureau
to furnish high-level intelligence data in the security field
to the President and the Attorney General on a continuing
basis. This letter will not be a vehicle for routine
dissemination; rather it will be comprised of information
obtained in connection with our investigations which has the
qualities of importance and timeliness necessary to secure
the President's interest and to provide him with meaningful
intelligence for his guidance. Mere rumors or nebulous infor-
mation will have no place in this letter.
It will be the responsibility of each field office
to furnish the Dureau on a continuing basis intelligence
itoms suitable for this letter. Each office must, in the
course of its normal business and submissions of information
to the Bureau, be alert to flag specific items for this
jurpose. For your guidance the following are suggested types
f information (not all-inclusive) that would be appropriate
for this intelligence letter:
(1) Information of national or international
Significance which is security related.
(2). Important current or pending developments
in major security cases.
(3) Current information which is representative
of or calls attention to a significant developing intelligence
trend.
(4) Material which has a bearing on national security,
particularly that from sensitive and/or penetrative coverage of
foreign establishments, which could affect American relations
with foreign countries, or assist in formulating United States
policy
2 - All other Offices
Y
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 193
;

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_197.jpeg ---
h
The Attorney General
Director FBI
-FRI INTELLIGENCE LETTER
FOR THE PRESIDENT
113
II
November 7, 1900
There is enclosed for your information a document
containing items of current intelligence interest, This
paper has been prepared to highlight cortain timely develop-
ments in our security and intelligence investigations.
Material of this typo will be furnished to you in this manner
on a continuing basis,
This document has also been made available to the
President. Upon removal of the classified enclosure, this
letter becomes unclassified.
-
Enclosure
-
L
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 197
1.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
RIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-28-3000 BYSTRAUM/BA
SIZALM
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_194.jpeg ---
Letter to Albany
FBI INTELLIGINCE LETTER
FOR THE PRESIDIOT
CODE NAME ON
b A
NESTARCIL-SATELLITE MATTER
:
(5) "Inside" information concerning dononstrations,
disorders or other civil disruptions which is of more than
local significance.
(6) Items with an unusual twist or concerning
prominent personalities which may be of special interest to
the President or the Attorney Gonoral.
All information submitted to the Bureau by your
office in investigations concerning old-line subversive
organizations, now loſt troups, racial matters, hate groups,
and espionage and counterintelligence matters should be
carefully reviewed daily for any items doomed pertinent to
this intelligence letter. Communications containing such
items should be submitted by the most expeditious moans
warranted and should be flagged with the code name "Inlet”
after the title and character. In those instances where an
airtel or letter is used, an additional copy should be furnished
the Bureau.
These instructions are to be implemented immediately.
It is absolutely essential that a steady flow of quality
intelligence data to received from eil field offices to make
this letter a success. Your submissions will be closely
followed at the Bureau to insure this matter is receiving
proper emphasis and attention.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 194
_
.
☐

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_195.jpeg ---
**
414
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
> : Mr. C. D. DeLoach
ROM
: Mr. W. C. Sullivan
JBJECT: FBI INTELLIGENCE LETTER.
FOR THE PRESIDENT
"
1
DATE: November 7, 1969
Pursuant to the Director's instructions to keep
the President fully informed of significant intelligence
developments within the purview of the Bureau's security
responsibilities, we will prepare and transmit to him, on
a continuing basis, an intelligence letter of the type
enclosed. To preserve the impact and selectivity of this
letter, dissemination is suggested for only the President
and the Attorney General.
RECOMMENDATION:
That the attached letters to the President and
the Attorney General be approved enclosing the proposed
current intelligence letter.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 195
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 200 RS
MDR-16
F
•
***
***** Vallarta Nudist famcEN
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_199.jpeg ---
DATE $2/82
62-116395
"ALL INFORMATION
EIN IS ENCLASSIFIED
CONTAINED
BY SUB To bue
APPROPRIATE AGENCIES
AND FIELD OFFICES
ADD BY ROUTING
SHIP(S) Cla
DATE 10-31-
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
CONEXCENTIAL)
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
EXCEPT WHERE SHOWN
OTHERWISE
1
1
1
-
-
Mr. J. B. Adams
Mr. J. A. Mintz
Mr. J. B. Hotis
1
-
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1
-
June 19, 1975
Mr. J. G. Deegan
Mr. R. L. Shackelford
1
-
Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. S. F. Phillips
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SBC)
RE:
TESTIMONY OF RETIRED FBI
SPECIAL AGENT (SA) ROBERT R.
NICHOLS BEFORE SSC EXECUTIVE SESSION
Set out below are the facts known to the FBI
concerning sworn testimony given to the SSC by Mr. Robert R.
Nichols who served as an A of the FBI from January 6, 1947,
until his retirement May 12, 1972. This information is
voluntarily furnished to the FBI by Nichols.
CIRCUMSTANCES PRELUDE TO TESTIMONY
On May 28, 1975, Nichols telephonically advised the
FBI that SSC Staff Member Lester B. Seidel had requested,
and Nichols agreed, to travel to Washington, D. C., from
Atlanta, Georgia, to be interviewed in the Committee's
offices. Seidel indicated the interview would concern
Martin Luther King, Jr., Stanley David Levison, and related
matters. Nichols was unable to advise whether it would be
a staff interview or an appearance for testimony purposes
before an Executive Session of the Committee. He was not
told by Seidel that his appearance would be pursuant to a
subpoena. Nichols requested that the FBI make available a
representative so that Nichols might consult with him during
the interview, if necessary. Nichols was informed that the
presence of a Bureau representative should not be interpreted
as the FBI furnishing counsel but that the representative
would merely assist Nichols in determining whether a specific
question should be answered or whether a response could
properly be declined because it falls within one or more
privileged areas. He was told these areas covered information
1
-
67-414885 (Personnel File Robert R. Nichols)
1 - 100-106670 (Martin Luther King, Jr.)
1 - 100-392452 (Stanley David Levison)
Original and one copy to Attorney General
SFP:mjg
198geral
(14) CLASS. & EXT. RY/SP-16SK/RG 10/31/88 eral
BY
REASON-FCIM II 11-2.4.2
DATE OF REVIEW
6-1-90
SEE NOTE PAGE TWELVE
MAIL ADOM CONFIDENTIAL) ENCLOSU
ROOM ☐
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 199
Gim
2
Jud
S
301
&

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_198.jpeg ---
1
Mr. J. B. Adams
1
Mr. J. A. Mintz
1
Mr. J. B. Hotis
The Attorney General
June 19, 1975
1
Director, FBI
6
U. S. SENATE SELECT COLIITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO IÍTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
1 -
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. J. G. Deegan
1 Mr. R. L. Shackelford
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. S. F. Phillips
Enclosed for your information is the original of
a memorandum concerning the testimony of retired FBI
Special Agent Robert R. Nichols before an Executive Session
of captioned Committee. A copy of the memorandum is also
enclosed for forwarding to Mr. James A. Wilderotter,
Associate Counsel to the President.
Enclosures (2)
62-116395
1 The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
12:07-414885 (Personnel File Robert R. Nichols)
100-106670 (Martin Luther King, Jr.)
100-392452 (Stanley David Levison)
pan
$FP:mjg/
(15)
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com,
Nen. lov.
Ident
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
-
Plan. & Evalt
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
1
1
*
ENCLOSURE
com.
ALL
for info, only for J. Wakhizer's instructions)
Scopes sent to CPR-Sept of Justice
11/22/76 - SCB
REC-102
62-116393/30/
MATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-31-80 BY SPORJ5/09
* 4
7
PLM
TELETYPE UNIT
Director Sec'y _
MAIL ROOM
4 JUL 3 1975
88326 Docld:32989611 Page 198
"
600 951-5
F|
+
10
dog 2 filed in
4
+

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_196.jpeg ---
L
NW 88326 Docld:3298
Page 19
4
*
+144
};
November 7, 1969
The President
The White House
Washington, D. C.
Dear Mr. President:
There is enclosed for your information
& document containing itens of current intelligence
interest. This paper has been prepared to highlight
certain timely developments in our security and
Material of this type
intelligence investigations.
will be furnished to you in this manner on a
continuing basis.
A copy of this document is being sent to
Upon removal of the classified
the Attorney General.
enclosure, this letter becomes unclassified.
Sincerely yours, .
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HERMINIS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 9-28-2000 BY SAim/ping
MDR-16
3
.. 2.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_20.jpeg ---
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Senstudy 75
62-116395
1
2. Borys and Conrad, when contacted by the Legal
Counsel Division, should be offered the services of a Bureau
representative who, if they desire, will accompany them to
the interview. This representative, although not actually
present during the interview, will be available nearby for
consultation purposes should the interview touch upon sensitive,
privileged information, such as relating to identities of
sources, sensitive techniques and methods, etc. INTD will
designate the representative for this purpose.
ADDENDUM: SFP:mjg 7/2/75
Euf
Pursuant to request of SA Daly of Legal Counsel
Division, SA Borys and former Assistant Director Conrad were
telephonically alerted to the planned interviews of them.
They were both told that they would be further contacted
by the Legal Counsel Division. Conrad specifically requested.
that his unlisted telephone number not be furnished to the SSC.
Euf
repanied
B
57. Phillys
Bonys 7/7 + will accompany
Course 1/9 P1/9/25
Consid
ok
Pa
WRW
Jm
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 20
- 2 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_2.jpeg ---
1
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington, D.C. 20520
SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents)
MEMORANDUM FOR LIEUTENANT GENERAL BRENT SCOWCROFT
THE WHITE HOUSE
with
FEI INFORMATION CONT
UNCLASSIFI
+
21-104
XEROX >>
JUL 14-1975
JFH
Subject: Senate Select Committee Request
for Documents on the Cabinet
Committee to Combat Terrorism
The Department of State has been asked by the
Senate Select Committee investigating intelligence to
provide information on the structure and functions of
the Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism and its
Working Group. Because all of the basic documents con-
cerning the CCT are Presidential, we are forwarding them
to you for review for possible release to the Senate
Committee.
The relevant documents are:
Memorandum for the President from Secretary William
P. Rogers on September. 18, 1972 (the report referred to
in the President's Memorandum of September 25, 1972);
Memorandum for the Secretary from President
Richard M. Nixon on September 25, 1972; and
Six reports to the President from the Chairman
of the Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism (the Secretary
of State).
These documents set forth the basic structure and
functions of the Cabinet Committee and its Working Group
WV
REC-5 63-116396-339
There are many functions of the Cabinet Committee and
its Working Group discussed in the reports to the
President other than the intelligence function being
investigated by the Senate Select Committee. We do not
see any need for the discussion of these other functions
to be withheld from the SSC. .
6 JUN 25 1975
17
51 JUL 23 975
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 2
SECRET
NFIDENTIAL When Separated
(CONFI
From Accompanying Documents)
5
UNRECORDED COPY FILED IN
>

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_201.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
CORIOLINTIAL
Attorney General (AG) before Nichols would be able to testify.
Such AG clearance was immediately obtained telephonically
through FBI Headquarters and Phillips advised Nichols,
Seidel and Mr. John Smith, of the office of Senator Walter D.
Huddleston of the Committee that clearance for the interview
had been obtained from the AG provided the interview was .
within the scope of the aforementioned areas. Phillips
further indicated that if Nichols believed the interview
was outside the scope, he could invoke 16.22, Code of Federal
Regulations. Arrangements were made for the Executive
Session to take place in the nearby ald Carroll Arms Hotel
while Phillips remained at the 88C offices in the event he was
needed for consultation purposes.
The Executive Session took place in Room 607 of
the old Carroll Arms Hotel and lasted approximately for the
period from 10:40 a.m., to 1:15 p.m. Present in addition to
Seidel, Bayly and Smith, were a male reporter and
Senator Huddleston who administered the oath to Nichols,
remained about twenty minutes and who asked only a few
questions. At the outset of this session, Seidel furnished
Nichols the Rules of Procedure of the SSC, including Senate
Resolution 21. Nichola
Nichols was permitted to look at the Rules
of Procedure and after a brief review, he told Seidel he was
satisfied as to the SSC authority and that they could proceed
with the questioning. Nichols was advised of his rights,
including that to counsel.
1.&
TESTIMONY OF ROBERT R. NICHOLS
The following reports the questions and answers as
furnished by Nichols, but not necessarily in chronological
order.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 201
- 3
3.
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_203.jpeg ---
$
U. S. Senate Select Committes to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
Court Seal [JFK Law 10(a)1]
CAN
JFIDENTIAL
Seidel questioned Nichols concerning alleged
In
harassment of King by the FBI and mentioned such specific
allegations as the following: Mending of a tape recording
to Mrs. King; anonymous telephone calls to attempt to
cancel press meetings by King; false fire alarms; and
furnishing of information about King to the clergy and there
news media, including an Atlanta editor, Ralph McGill.
each instance during this phase of the questioning, which
Nichols described as rather extensive by Seidel, Nichols
answered that he did not participate in any such actions
and was unaware that any such things were being done. He
also told Seidel that he knew of no COINTELPRO (counterintel-
ligence) activity on the part of the FBI against King.
i
Nichols was asked if he had contacts at Atlanta,
Georgia, Police Department (PD) in the King investigation
which Nichols acknowledged he had been assigned to in 1964.
Nichols answered that he had confided in one detective in
the security detail of the PD and on the urging of Seidel,
Nichols furnished the detective's identity as Sergeant
Bobby Moore.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 203
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_200.jpeg ---
3
CON
TAL
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SBC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
which might compromise a source; information which might
divulge a sensitive investigative technique or method;
information which might divulge what had been furnished the
FBI by other Government agencies and/or foreign intelligence
sources; and information which might adversely affect an
ongoing investigation. It was pointed out to Nichols that
if he so desired, he could obtain private counsel. He was
invited to obtain additional personal briefing on the early
morning of May 30, 1975, before his appearance before the
SSC, from the Legal Counsel Division and the Intelligence
Division of the FBI
&
Early on the morning of May 30, 1975, Nichols was
briefed by the FBI, including advice to him that his
employment agreement with the FBI was being waived for the
purposes of the interview by the SSC to the extent that it
pertained to King, Levison and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference (SCLC), the organization which had been
headed up by King. Nichols was reminded of the areas of
privilege and, at his request, was accompanied to the SSC
offices by SA Seynor F. Phillips of the FBI.
At the SSC offices, Nichols and Phillips met
Mr. John Bayly of the office of the Minority Counsel of the
Committee who indicated that the interview would be under
oath. Staff Member Seidel then appeared and inquiry was
made of him by Phillips as to whether the interview would
be under oath, it being noted that it was only then, after
appearing at the SSC offices, that Nichols and Phillips
became aware of the oath aspects of the interview. When
Seidel said that Nichols would be interviewed in an Executive
Session, Phillips asked that he be permitted to confer with
FBI Headquarters as it would require clearance from the
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 200
2
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_202.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
CONFIDENTIAL
Nichols was questioned about the communist background
of Levison. He replied that he could not discuss this matter
because it would jeopardize an FBI source. Nichols indicated
that he did not know the identity of the source. Seidel,
who did most of the questioning throughout the session, then
askød Nichols a series of questions attempting to determine
whether the source was a technical one, a foreign one, a
"Soviet” one, also naming several other types.
eral other types. Nichola
answer in each case was that he did not know. At one point,
Seidel claimed that Nichols had said it was a foreign source.
Nichols then stated he did not recall having so stated and
that if he had so stated, it was wrong as he did not know
the source. Seidel then asked how Nichols know that the
information he had would disclose the source if he was
unaware of the source's identity. Nichols responded that
inammuch as he knew in advance the interview would include
the subject of Levison, he had asked Phillips of the FBI
what he could discuss about Levison. Nichols then related
that Phillips had asked Nichols what he knew or recalled about
Levison's background and that when he gave Phillips certain
information, Phillips told him that that information would
possibly identify the source and, therefore, would be
privileged. (The Hichols-Phillips exchange referred to here
took place during the early morning of that same day, May 30,
1975).
R
Court Seal [JFK Law 10 (a)1]
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 202
CONFIDENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_204.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
INITIAL
Nichols was questioned as to what type of
investigation concerning King was conducted besides the
use of a technical surveillance. Nichols replied that he
had attempted to initiate action to infiltrate the SCLC
with live informants but that every one of his suggestions
along this line was turned down by FBI Headquarters. Nichols
furnished the reason for these rejections as being that the
FBI did not want to interfere with civil rights organizations
but indicated that the Bureau had never told him this in
the rejections and that it was his own rationale. Nichols
indicated that from time to time spot physical surveillances
would take place in Atlanta to verify contacts between King
and individuals known or suspected of being communists.
During this phase of the interview, Seidel mentioned the name
of Harry Wachtel and Nichols acknowledged he was one of
King's contacts. In response to
In response to a question as to whether or
not trash or mail covers were used against King, Nichols
responded that they were not.
Inquiry was made as to why so much reliance was
placed by the FBI on technical coverage of King and so little
was done in the way of physical surveillances. Seidel
pointed out that a technical surveillance of an individual
was a greater infringement of his privacy than was a physical
surveillance. Nichols responded that the Bureau did what it
felt was necessary to get the information it needed. Seidel
then asked Nichols how he would personally feel about a
technical surveillance on him, Nichols. Nichols' response
was that he would rather have his phone tapped than to always
be followed around.
Nichols was questioned concerning the authority for
the technical surveillance of King and how Nichols would
learn of such authority. Nichols explained that he would be
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 204
6 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_209.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
Also at the conclusion of the testimony, Michols
was told that a draft of the testimony would be made available for
him to review for editing purposes. The SSC would telephone
Nichols who was returning to Atlanta to advise him the draft would
be available and Nichols would have five days to review same.
Nichols was told that the draft could not be mailed to him but
that someone might bring it to Atlanta; otherwise, Nichols would
have to return to Washington, D. C., if he wanted to review it.
Expenses for such a second trip were not mentioned.
On June 2, 1975, Nichols telephoned FBI Headquarters
from Birmingham, Alabama, where he was temporarily residing
and advised he recalled the following additional details of
what was covered in his testimony.
Seidel asked Nichols if information received through
technical coverage included information relating to
Court Seal [JFK Law 10(a)1]
Senator Huddleston asked Nichols how it would be
possible to follow the Bureau instruction precisely and Nichols
responded that it would be very difficult to comply and in some
instances, it would not be possible. Seidel then commented,
because of the nature of the beast?" (viratap).
"Why
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 209
11
DOKIDENTIAL
!

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_208.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Govermental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (BA) Robert R.
Nichola Before SSC Executive Session
IDENTIAL
Attempt was made by Seidel to question Nichols
concerning FBI investigation of the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee but Nichols refused to discuss the
matter on the basis it was outside the parameters of the
testimony.
Nichols was questioned concerning an alleged visit
of William C. Sullivan to Atlanta to see the newspaper
editor Ralph McGill. This discussion was initiated in the
context of the allegation that the FBI furnished information
about King to the news media. Nichols responded that he did
not remember Sullivan ever coming to Atlanta.
Nichols was asked if he knew about the writing of
a monograph about King by an FBI Agent named Charles Brennan.
Nichols responded that he did not know of this.
Nichols advised that he was offered the opportunity
to make a statement at the beginning of his testimony but
declined to do so. He was given the same offer at the close
of his testimony and he made a statement to the following
effect. Nichols believed that the Bureau had always
conducted the King investigation with the objective of
determining the extent of communist influences on King and
on the SCLC and that the only way to make a determination as
to the full extent required technical coverage. Nichols
pointed out that the Bureau never interfered in the legitimate
civil rights activities of individuals or organizations or
harassed such people and that it was Nichols' belief that FBI
personnel were doing what they were being paid for when they
conducted legitimate investigations revolving around
communism and communist influences in civil rights activities.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 208
10 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_206.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
Nichols was questioned about his contacts with
another retired FBI Agent, Alan Sentinella, to whom the King
case was assigned after it had been handled by Nichols.
Nichols was asked if he had discussed his forthcoming
testimony with Sentinella who resides in Atlanta. Nichols
acknowledged that he had had a discussion with Sentinella
but that they had both purposely avoided any discussion of the
substance of Nichols' testimony-to-be and the testimony which
Sentinella had already given the SSC. They discussed only
procedural aspects as Nichols wanted to have some idea in
advance as to what might be expected in any trip to Washington
to testify. It was Nichols' impression that Seidel thought
that Nichols was holding out some information on this matter.
On at least three occasions Seidel inquired of
Nichols as to whether he had discussed his forthcoming
testimony with Charles Harding of Atlanta, a retired FBI
Agent who had also been acquainted with the King case in 1964.
On each oction, Nichols denied that he had had any discussion
with Harding on this matter.
Nichols was questioned as to whether the technical
surveillance on King was justified and his response was that
it was justified. When asked why, Nichols stated that there
was considerable evidence of communist influences on King
inasmuch as King was receiving much advice in his work from
Levison and other communists. Seidel asked if they included
Jack O'Dell and Harry Wachtel and Nichols acknowledged that
it did. When Nichols was asked as to whether or not he had
developed any information as to the communist background of
Levison, O'Dell or Wachtel, Nichols responded that he had
not and that the information was developed by others.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 206
- 8 -
GON

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_205.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
TAL
called into the office of the Special Agent in Charge and
told that advice from the Bureau had been received that the
technical surveillance was authorized. When inquiry was
made concerning the mechanics of installing the surveillance,
Nichols answered that he had nothing to do with this phase.
On questioning, Nichols discussed the monitoring plant
he had set up with a cover company and Nichols gave the general
location of the plant. Nichols indicated that he did not know
who actually made the installation and was asked if an
Al Miller was the mound man in the office. Nichols
acknowledged that he was and when asked if Nichols had
monitored the surveillance, Nichols indicated he had on a
spot basis,
Nichols was questioned and furnished information
of a biographical and personal nature. It included such
things as the period of time he was assigned in Atlanta, the
period of time assigned security work, the King case and
criminal work, as well as when and why he had been transferred
from Atlanta to Oklahoma City. Seidel brought up the matter
of Nichols' testimony in Houston, Texas, in connection with
an FBI case concerning the heavyweight boxer Cassius Clay.
On questioning, Kichols acknowledged he had been transferred
to Oklahoma City because of what the Bureau considered his
deficiencies in his testimony in that case, Seidel inquired
as to what actually Nichols had done wrong and Nichols
replied that he had received a letter of censure but had thrown
it away and cannet now recall the specific deficiencies for
which he was censured. He only recalled that his testimony
was considered not up to Bureau standards. Seidel then asked,
"What are the Bureau standards? Didn't you tell the truth?”
Nichols responded that there was no question as to the
truthfulness of his testimony, that he had told the truth.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 205
-7.
CONVIDENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_207.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Govermental Operations With
Respect to Intelligence Activities (SBC)
Re: Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
At one point, when Seidel asked about alleged
harassment by the FBI, Nichols told him of FBI investigations
of church burnings in South Georgia and that the Bureau
recognized outstanding work by its Agents in this field
and that some of the Agents, including Nichols, had received
meritorious awards. Nichols indicated that he had been
commended for his work generally in civil rights investigations.
When asked about what the FBI was doing in the King
case besides use of wiretaps, Nichols advised that he had
attended a conference at FBI Headquarters to explore avemues
of investigation that might be pursued in the King case.
The objective was to discuss ways of better determining the
extent of the ommunist influences on King. Nichols furnished
the names of the following FBI personnel as attending the
conference: Agents Henry Rouse and Nichols from Atlanta;
and from FBI Headquarters, Assistant Director William C.
Sullivan, and Agents Larry Gurley and Fred Baumgardner.
(Nichols advised that also attending the conference was
a Bureau official, Joseph Sizoo, but that he did not furnish
this name during his testimony as he did not then recall his
presence at the conference). Nichols told the SSC that he
could not remember what decisions were made at the conference.
Nichols was questioned concerning a dispute between
King and former FBI Director Hoover which had been aired by
the news media. Nichols was asked if the dispute was the
reason for technical coverage of King and Nichols answered
that he was convinced that that was not the reason for the
technical coverage; that such coverage was otherwise fully
justified. Nichols pointed out that the investigation of
King was initiated before the dispute although it was his
recollection that the technical coverage started after the
dispute.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 207
. 9 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_21.jpeg ---
TO
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
«Memorandum
: Mr. J. B. Adams
FROM Mr. W. R. Wannall
SUBJECT: SENSTUDY 75
1
Mr. Callahan
1 Mr. Jenkins
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adma
Adria
Dep. AD Iny
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
-
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
DATE:
6/30/75
1
-
Mr. Adams
1
-
Each Assistant Director Inteli.
1
-
Mr. Cregar
Laboratory
Legal Coun.
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
-
This memorandum records the receipt of the
latest request from the Senate Select Committee (SSC).
On the evening of 6/27/75, Mr. K. William O'Connor
of the Department of Justice furnished to Mr. Paul Daly of the
Legal Counsel Division the attached copy of a draft letter to
the Attorney General (AG) from Senators Church and Tower along
with notifications concerning certain matters currently under
investigation by the SSC which relate to the FBI as well as to
the Department of Justice.
The latest request which is identified as a draft
is broken down into three sections identified as: I. Issues,
II. Areas of General Inquiry, and III. Case Studies.
I. Issues
1
The SSC's inquiry into the intelligence and counter.
intelligence activities of the FBI is designed to examine
fundamental issues which bear directly on the adequacy of
current legislation and administrative organization and procedure.
As a means of examining the issues in the context of actual FBI
intelligence operations, the Committee intends to study certain
specific topics, some of which are general in nature and others
of which involve specific cases, programs or techniques. The
specific issues are set out in the attachment under section
I. A-F.
II. Areas of General Inquiry.
| areas
REC-84
62-116395-329
The following contains descriptions of the general
areas of inquiry into which the Committee intends to engage:
Enclosures
ALL INFOR
WOC: ebc
(18)
4- ENCLOSURE
4 JUL 17 1975
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 21
IS
DATE 10-13-200SPLAYPP
MDR-14
3 JUL 10 1975
CONTINUED
OVER.
Lys

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_210.jpeg ---
U. S. Senate Select Committee to
Study Governmental Operations With
Xespect to Intelligence Activities (SSC)
Re:
Testimony of Retired FBI
Special Agent (SA) Robert R.
Nichols Before SSC Executive Session
CONFIDENTIAL
John Smith of Senator Huddleston's office asked the
difference between a bug and a wiretap and Nichols responded
that a bug was a microphone implanted on the premises whereas
a wiretap was an interception of a telephone line. Smith then
asked if there was a bug on King or the SCLC in Atlanta and
Nichols responded "not to my knowledge. Seidel asked about
any other places in Atlanta where there may have been bugs on
King and Nichols advised he had no knowledge of any. Seidel
asked if Nichols was familiar with a Willard Hotel (Washington,
D. C.) incident involving King and Nichols responded that he
was not.
NOTE:
Original and one copy to the Attorney General copy
for forwarding to the White House. Debriefing of Nichols,
including telephonic contact from him 6/2/75, by S. F. Phillips.
NW 88076 lox:32989611 Page 210
12
X
TUNDIDENTIAL

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_22.jpeg ---
-1
I
Memorandum for Mr. Adams
SENSTUDY 75
RE:
(A) Legal Authority for FBI Intelligence and
Counterintelligence Activities
(B) Organization and Operation of the FBI
Intelligence Division (INTD)
(c) FBI Internal Security Intelligence Operations
(D)
FBI and the U. S. Intelligence Community
(E)
FBI Foreign Counterintelligence Operations
Inspection Division Investigations
(F)
(G) FBI Intelligence Activities and State or Local
Law Enforcement Agencies
III. Case Studies
This section contains descriptions of specific cases
in which the SSC is interested. The descriptions indicate
whether the investigations may concentrate on specific allega-
tions of possible abuses or other controversial matters where
there is reason to believe in the words of the Committee
improprieties may have occurred.
In this portion of the enclosed request the Committee
lists 19 general questions. In addition, under each case study
the letter requests additional information and documents.
The case studies in which the Committee is interested
are identified as follows:
(A). Electronic Surveillance
1. Warrantless Electronic Surveillance
2.
3.
4.
Warrantless Electronic Surveillance
and Leaks
Surveillance of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Surveillance at the Democratic National
Convention, Atlantic City, 1964
(B). Surreptitious Entry
CONTINUED
-
OVER
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 22
- 2 -
-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_24.jpeg ---
>>
Memorandum for Mr. Adams
SENSTUDY 75
RE:
ACTION:
We feel that a meeting with Elliff would be
beneficial and plan to meet with him as soon as possible
to obtain clarification of this latest SSC request.
whic
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 24
- 4 4-
ahme
Oz
PLM

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_23.jpeg ---
C
$-
Memorandum for Mr. Adams
RE: SENSTUDY 75
(c). Mail Covers and Mail Openings
Other Specific Techniques
(D).
(E).
COINTELPRO and Disruptive Activities
(F).
Clandestine Informant Activities
(G). Notional Organizations
(H). Joint FBI
-
Police Operations
1. The White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
2.
Mississippi
The Black Panther Party, Chicago
(I). The Huston Plan
(J). Alleged Political Misuse of the FBI
The remaining portions of the enclosed letter are
directed to the Department of Justice and are not being
addressed in this memorandum.
In connection with another Senstudy matter, Section
Chief William O. Cregar had a meeting with Mr. John Elliff who
is Chief of the Task Force for the SSC on the morning of 6/30/75.
Elliff apologized for the submission of the 6/25/75 draft letter,
saying it was forced upon the Committee by the White House.
According to Elliff, the SSC has been aware that much of the
information requested from the Intelligence Community was being
held up by the White House until such time as the SSC identified
specific abuses it was interested in investigating. As a result,
the attached draft was put together by the SSC to break the
logjam. Elliff admitted that much of the information requested
in the 6/25/75 draft letter was embodied in the request of 5/14/75.
For this reason, Elliff advised he contacted Mr. K. William
O'Connor, Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination, Depart-
ment of Justice, on the morning of 6/30/75 to request a meeting
between himself, O'Connor, and Messrs Wannall, Mintz and Cregar.
The purpose of the meeting would be to allow Elliff to clarify
the draft letter of 6/25/75.
* FBI
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 23
CONTINUED
-
OVER
-
- 3 -

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_29.jpeg ---
1
ii
A
1
Page
B.
3. Electronic Surveillance of
Dr. Martin Luther King
4. Electronic Surveillance and the
Democratic National Convention,
Atlantic City, 1964
:
Surreptitious Entry
c. Mail Covers and Mail Openings
D.
Other Specific Techniques
E... COINTELPRO and Disruptive Activities
F. Clandestine Informant Activities
G.
"Notional" Organizations
H.. Joint FBI-Police Operations
1. White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
Mississippi
2. Black Panther Party, Chicago
I. The "Huston Plan"
J.
Alleged Political Misuse of the FBI
IV. Department of Justice
"
A. The Attorney General
B.
The Internal Security Section (formerly
Division)
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 29.
:
the
+

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_27.jpeg ---
Liv
- 3.
-
positions. Where appropriate, the subject's description
indicates, pursuant to the agreed Outline for Inquiry
Procedures, the matter primarily concerns allegations of abuse
or other controversial specific matters where there is reason
to believe improprieties may have occurred. Finally,
the
notifications indicate the name(s) of the staff members(s)
who, in addition to the Committee's senior staff, will be
responsible for the particular matters.
The Committee, in the course of the next few months,
will undertake other subjects for investigation as its work
proceeds and will notify you as appropriate.
matters.
We look forward to your cooperation in these
Sincerely yours,
#
"
NW-88326 Docid:32989611 Page 27
1
Frank Church
Chairman
John Tower
Vice Chairman
"
*
"I
5
"
I

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_25.jpeg ---
-
DRAFT
L
FRANK CHURCH, IDAHO, CHAIRMAN
JOHN G. TCWLR, TEXAS, VICE CHANGE AND
PHILIP A. HART, MICH.
vigerNDALE, MINN.
WAL D. HURTLESTON, KY.
RODENT MORGAN N.C
GARY HART, COLO.
HOWARD H. Ð³
BANNY GOLDWA
TENN.
**
CHARLES MC C. MANIAS, JR., MD.
RICHARD 5. SCHWEIXER, PA,
WILLIAM G. MILLER, STAFF DIRECTOR
BREDERICK A. O. SCHWARZ, JR., CHIEF COUNSEL
CURTIS R. SMOTHERS, MINONITY COUNSEL
Wlnited States Senate
SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
(PURSUANT TO S. RES. 21, 14TH CONGRESS)
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20510
1
The Honorable Edward H. Levi
The Attorney General
U. S. Department of Justice
Washington, D.C.
20530
Dear Mr. Attorney General;
June 25, 1975
Enclosed with this letter are notifications concerning
certain matters currently under investigation by the Select
Committee which relate to government entities under your
jurisdiction.
These notifications are submitted pursuant to an
agreement between the Committee, the various intelligence
entities, and the White House. Pursuant to that agreement,
the various entities in the Executive Branch have agreed not
only to make available the pertinent witnesses, but also to
submit in response all information and material which they
possess that is relevant to the areas and cases which the
Committee wishes to investigate. The response should include
all relevant underlying documentation and other information,
including documents which may not have come to the Committee's
. attention and which the Committee has not specifically requested,
and all material relating to any prior Executive Branch inquiry
into the matter. In addition, we would welcome a current
analysis of the particular questions raised by the Committee
and any other observations on the subject that you believe
would be helpful.
We welcome the promine of cooperation and full dis-
closure that underlies that agreement. Success in fulfilling
the full disclosure policy contained in the agreement is
indispensible to the Committee's analysis and to the formulation
of our ultimate findings, conclusions, and recommendations.
Within the Committee mandate, contained in S. Res. 21,
there are four broad subjects relating to the intelligence
community which we are required to investigate and study in
order to determine the facts and ultimately to decide whether
to make recommendations for legislative or other changes.
They are:
EFBI
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-11-2000 BY 3/ILLIN Dry
MDRYG
NW-88326 Docld:32989611 Page 25
62-116395-329
ENCLOSURE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_26.jpeg ---
--
B
1.
2.
3.
4.
The structure; performance, and utility of
government operations with respect to
intelligence activities%3B
Whether certain policies or practices are or
are not illegal, unethical, or otherwise
improper;
Whether there has or has not been excessive
duplication or inadequate coordination between
and among intelligence agencies and, more
generally, the efficiency of intelligence
activities%3B and
Whether there has or has not been adequate
internal and external control and oversight
over the policies and practices of intelli-
gence agencies.
In attempting to find the answers to these fundamental
questions, the Committee is proceeding in two ways. First, we
are examining intelligence functions broadly as instruments
of government policy, giving attention to the authority for
particular functions, the problems which intelligence activi-
ties are designed to solve, the procedures by which intelli-
gence activities are and have been proposed, approved,
: executed, .evaluated, and terminated, the range and scope of
the activities utilized to achieve intelligence objectives,
and the propriety and utility of the activities undertaken.
Second, we will examine in depth certain specific subjects
within the broad topics of investigation. (We would, of
course, welcome your suggestion of other cases that would
give added insight into intelligence matters under your
jurisdiction.) These specific subjects for investigation
are not intended to limit the scope contained in the more
general questions.
The annexed notifications spell these matters out in
greater detail. In addition, they ask certain specific questions,
set forth certain previously requested documents not yet received,
request additional documents,* and, in some cases, ask for the
names and present addresses of persons who have held certain
i
3
* These specific requests are not, of course, intended to
limit the agreement to come forward with all relevant
information and material, including documents, whether or
not they have been brought to the Committee's attention or
have been specifically requested by the Committee.
"
NW-88326 Docld:32989611 Page 26
*

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_28.jpeg ---
1.
x
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(Including DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE)
+
Table of Contents
Page
I. Issues
II. Areas of General Inquiry
4
A.
Legal Authority for FBI Intelligence and
Counterintelligence Activities
B. Organization and Operation of the FBI
Intelligence Division
1. FBI Internal Security Intelligence
Operations
2. The FBI and the U. S. Intelligence
Community
3.
4.
5.
FBI Foreign Counterintelligence
Operations
Inspection Division Investigations.
FBI Intelligence Activities and State
or Local Law Enforcement Agencies
III. Case Studies
T
General Questions
A. Electronic Surveillance
1.
2.
Warrantless Electronic Surveillance
Warrantless Electronic Surveillance
and "Leaks"
ALL INFORMATION CONTI
HEREIN IS UNCLASSITED
DATE 10-16-2000 BY SPRAUM
GRO MDR-16
"
2-116395-327
ENCLOSURE
NW 88326 'Docld:32989611 Page 28
64

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_3.jpeg ---
!
i
L
SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents)
-2-
For your convenience we have noted below the sections
of the reports to the President that relate to the intel-
ligence aspect of the Cabinet Committee and its Working
Group:
September 18, 1972 memo
#11.
10
page 2: #2, 3; page 4:
--
7, 9.
November 2, 1972 memo - page 1; page 2; paragraph 3.
January 8, 1973 memo - page 1: #3;B page 2: #6,
March 8, 1973 memo
-
page 1: #6..
March 29, 1973
memo
-
page 1: paragraph 2; page 2:
paragraph I.
paragraph 1; page 3:
-
June 27, 1973 memo page 1: #2, 3; page 2:
paragraph 6.
February 18, 1975 memo Page 3: paragraph 3, 5;
page 6:
paragraph 5, 6; Tab 2 (Guidelines) page 4: para-
graph 3; Tab 3 (Procedures) Enclosure #1 page. 5: para-
graph 4.
In addition to the above documents, we would also plan
to provide the Senate Committee with the following nar-
rative statement on the CCT and intelligence:
Begin Statement (CONFIDENTIAL):
With the exception of a weekly publication by the
CIA on international terrorism, requested by the Cabinet
Committee on January 1, 1973, the intelligence functions
of the Cabinet Committee and its Working Group are handled
through established interagency channels. The agencies
most active in generation and coordination of terrorism
information for the Working Group are the CIA, the FBI,
NSA, DOD, the Secret Service, the Department of Treasury
and the State Department.
SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents)
KW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 3

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_30.jpeg ---
$
"
1
. I.
Issues
N
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVEST NATION
(INCLUDING DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE)
b
T
The Committee's inquiry into the intelligence and
counterintelligence activities. of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation is examining fundamental issues which
bear directly on the adequacy of current legislation
and administrative organization and procedure. The
Committee seeks to determine whether FBI intelligence
and counterintelligence activities achieve legitimate
objectives in conformity with the rule of law. Among
the basic issues to be addressed are the following:
A.
B.
. c.
D.
E.
"
What is the legal authority for FBI intelligence
and counterintelligence activities? Should the
FBI's authority be clarified or revised or
incorporated in a comprehensive statutory
charter?
What limitations are placed on FBI intelligence
and counterintelligence activities by the
Constitution and laws of the United States?
Should these limitations be clarified or
revised?
->
What have been the purposes and aims of FBI
intelligence and counterintelligence activities?
Should these objectives be modified?:
How have the intelligence and counterintelligence
activities of the FBI been organized and coordinated
with other agencies of government? Should these
procèdures and practices be revised?
What have been the procedures for and techniques
of intelligence gathering and dissemination and
counterintelligence operations used by the FBI?
Under what conditions and through what procedures
should these methods and techniques be used in
the future?
-
"
F. What have been and should be the mechanisms for
internal and external policy-making, control,
and supervision of FBI intelligence and counter-
intelligence activities?
1.
I
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HOMEIN IS UNCLASSISTED
DATE 10-16-SON BY SPRAIN
MDR-M
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 30
62-593-329

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_33.jpeg ---
i
I
4
- 4
-
1
The Committee's inquiry focuses on the following
specific areas:
13 FBI Internal Security Intelligence Operations
2.
-
The Committee seeks to determine the nature
and purpose of FBI intelligence operations
directed at foreign intelligence activities
and subversive or extremist activities within
the United States. It has been alleged that
the scope of FBI intelligence investigations
is too broad and has extended to legitimate
political activities. Consequently, the Com-
mittee must examine how the FBI's responsibili-
ties have been defined.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mark Gitenstein
The FBI and the U. S. Intelligence Community.
The Committee seeks to determine what have
been the policies and procedures for coordina-
tion between the FBI and other agencies in the
U. S. intelligence community. There have been
occasions in the past where friction between
the FBI and other agencies has produced serious
dissatisfaction within the U. S. intelligence
community. The purpose of this inquiry is to
evaluate the adequacy of past and present co-
ordinating mechanisms.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mark Gitenstein
NW 88326. Docld:32989611 Page 33
"
n
:..
"
I
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_31.jpeg ---
x
:.
2 -
As a means of examining the above issues in the
' context of actual FBI intelligence operations,
the Committee intends to study certain specific
_ topics, some of which are general in nature, and
others of which involve specific cases, programs
or techniques. Part II, below, contains descriptions
of the general areas into which the Committee: intends
to inquire: Part III contains descriptions of the
specific cases mentioned above. The descriptions
specifically indicate whether the investigation may
concentrate on specific allegations of possible
abuses or other controversial matters where there
is reason to believe improprieties may have occurred.
In addition to the topics described below, additional
areas of inquiry may develop during the course of the
Committee's work.
"
NW.88326 Docld:32989611 Page 31
12
I
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_32.jpeg ---
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 32
-3-
II. Areas of General Inquiry
A. 'Legal Authority for FBI Intelligence and Counter-
intelligence Activities
:
:
The Committee is examining the legal basis for FBI
intelligence and counterintelligence activities.
There may be serious question as to the adequacy
of the present legislative framework for the FBI's
functions in these fields. Current statutes
authorize the FBI to perform investigative and law
enforcement functions, but they do not specifically
authorize intelligence or counterintelligence
activities. Therefore, the Committee seeks to
determine whether the FBI's authority should be
clarified, revised, or incorporated in a compre-
hensive statutory charter.
Responsible staff:
Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mark Gitenstein
Organization and Operation of the FBI Intelli
gence Division
The Committee is investigating the structure and
operating practices of the FBI Intelligence Divi-
sion. Proposals have been made that the national
security intelligence and counterintelligence
functions of the FBI should be lodged in a separate
agency or otherwise separated from the FBI's
criminal investigative activities. Further recom-
mendations have been advanced for improved coordina-
• tion between the FBI and other intelligence agencies,
for strengthened supervision of FBI intelligence and.
counterintelligence activities by the Attorney
General or an independent board, and for clearer
standards and procedures for FBI activities in this
area. Therefore, the Committee desires complete
information on the operating practices and proce-
dures of the FBI Intelligence Division and of the
field office activities supervised by the Intelli-
gence Division.
1
11
'
I
:
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_35.jpeg ---
!
F
- 6
1
5.
FBI Intelligence Activities and State or Local
Law Enforcement Agencies
The Committee seeks to determine the nature of
the relationships between FBI intelligence
activities and state and local law enforcement
agencies. This subject involves the delicate
balance between the necessary centralization
of certain law enforcement activities and the
Constitutionally-mandated decentralization of
general law enforcement responsibility. It is
necessary for the Committee to evaluate the
centralizing influence of the FBI, as well as
the FBI's role as a check on local law enforce-
ment abuses.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mark Gitenstein
Walter Ricks
-
:
NW-88326 Docld:32989611 Page 35
:

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_34.jpeg ---
1
i
-
5
3.
4.
FBI Foreign Counterintelligence Operations
The Committee seeks to determine the nature of
FBI counterintelligence operations directed at
foreign intelligence activities within the
United States or at any other hostile foreign-
related activities within the United States.
Since FBI operations to "counter" these activi-
ties go beyond intelligence collection, the
Committee must consider whether such practices
require statutory authorization. The impact
of counterintelligence operations on United
States foreign relations will also be considered.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Loch Johnson
Barbara Banoff
Inspection Division Investigations
The Committee is examining the relationship
of the FBI Inspection Division to FBI intelli-
gence and counterintelligence activities. This
includes both regular Inspection Division
reviews of Intelligence Division and field
office functions and specific investigations
of allegations of improper conduct in connec-
tion with FBI intelligence activities.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mark Gitenstein
:
:
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 34
"
$
11
-
h

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_36.jpeg ---
I
III.
1
Case Studies
1+
"
•
General Questions
The descriptions which follow of the specific cases the
Committee intends to study are intended to serve the
L
dual purpose of notifying the FBI of the issues the
Committee will explore in connection with each case
and eliciting from the FBI all information and material
in its possession relating to the questions the Committee
wishes to explore in each case. In order to avoid
unnecessary repetition of certain questions which will
be basic to the Committee's investigations of each
case, certain fundamental questions are set forth
below. As to each case described, the Committee
intends to explore these fundamental questions, and
expects that the FBI will, as to each case, provide
all information and material it has relating to these
basic questions even though they are not repeated in
the discussion of each particular area.
1.
"
What is or has been the legal authority for the
activity?
2. What have been the purposes of the activity?
3. What techniques have been employed in the activity?
4.
. 5.
6.
What kinds of information have been gathered in
the activity?
+
How have specific uses of the activity been initiated
and approved?
How have the targets for the activity been selected?
7. What have been the criteria for target selection?
8.
}
How has the intelligence which is collected been
used?
To whom has the intelligence collected been dis-
seminated?'
10. What has been the basis for any dissemination with
respect to each recipient?
11.
}
How has the activity been coordinated with other
intelligence agencies?
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 36.
n

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_37.jpeg ---
*
1
}
· 12.
What have been the effects of this coordination?
13. To what extent has each of the foregoing been com-
patible with the legal authority for and the purposes
of the activity?
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
By what means has the activity been monitored,
controlled and administered?
What are the potential abuses to which the activity
. may lead?
To what abuses has the activity led?
What steps have been taken to investigate such
abuses?
What steps have been taken to avoid such abuses?
19. What have been the costs and utility of the
activity?
In some instances, the specific questions set forth
below may appear to repeat some of the general questions.
The purpose in such cases is simply to clarify the appli-
cation of the general question to the specific case.
Except where inapplicable by their terms, all general
questions relate to each specific case.
NW-88326 Docld:32989611 Page 37
"
$5
+
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_38.jpeg ---
:
4
A.
Electronic Surveillance
The Committee is examining all forms of electronic
interception of communications including wiretap-
ping, electronic eavesdropping, consensual elec-
tronic surveillance interception of video and data
communications, local monitoring devices, and all
other forms of electronic or technical monitoring.
The Committee's general questions apply to each of
1 the techniques listed above, as well as to the
matters set forth in the following specific cases.
Warrantless Electronic Surveillance
•
1.
The Committee seeks to determine whether the
Attorney General should have the authority
to authorize electronic surveillance for cer-
tain purposes without a prior judicial warrant.
This power has been exercised by succeeding
Attorneys General since 1940, upon the explicit
directive of the President. The Supreme Court
has ruled that this power does not extend to
purely domestic matters, but the remaining scope
of the Attorney General's authority remains un-
defined by the Supreme Court.
41
I
i
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the
Justice Department address the following specific
questions:
a.
What is the scope and basis of the claim
of Executive authority to conduct warrant-
less electronic surveillance?
b. What have been the procedures for considera-
tion and approval of requests for warrantless
electronic surveillance authorized by the
Attorney General?
"
ļ
c.
What are the specific disadvantages of the
judicial warrant requirement for those
electronic surveillances which have been
authorized by the Attorney General?
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-16-200 BY 5/7 ALL-/4
MDR16
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 38
De Lost RE -1163.95-3.27
ENCLOSURE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_40.jpeg ---
i
F
"
M
2.
-
Warrantless Electronic Surveillance and
"Leaks"
_
The Committee is examining several instances of
the use of warrantless electronic surveillance
and other investigative techniques in connection
with "leaks" of classified information. These
cases may involve specific allegations of abuse
or other controversial matters where there is
reason to believe.improprieties may have
occurred. These instances include:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
The investigation of alleged "leaks" by or
to 17 Executive officials and newsmen
between May 1969 and February 1971.
*.
The investigation of alleged "leaks" from
a military staff member assigned to the
National Security Council in 1971-72.
The reported investigation of columnist
Joseph Kraft in 1969.
The reported investigation of the activities
of Mrs. Anna Chennault and Vice Presidential
candidate Spiro Agnew in 1968.
Any other instances of warrantless electronic
surveillance in connection with the investi-
gation of "leaks" to the press.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the
Justice Department address the following specific
questions:
a.
b.
•
Through what procedures and by whom were
each of these electronic surveillances auth-
orized and approved, continued, and terminated?
As to each person to whom information was
disseminated, please state:
(1) The nature of the information.
(2) The basis for the dissemination.
NW-88326-Docld:329896-11-Page 40

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_41.jpeg ---
(3)
The date of each dissemination.
(4)
The use which was in fact made of the
information by the recipient.
C.
I
Q.
e.
What evaluations were made of the original
grounds for the surveillance as it progressed?
What were the results of the evaluations?
Who made them?
f. What are the reasons for use of electronic
surveillance without judicial warrant to
investigate "leaks" of classified information
to the press?
g.
h.
How does each of the above instances relate
to these reasons?
To what extent would requirement of a
warrant interfere with the ability to
detect such leaks?
Responsible staff:
Senior staff
Task Force leader.
Mark Gitenstein
1r
:
NW-88326-Docld:32989611-Page 41
14

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_42.jpeg ---
I
'
"
3
H
1
Surveillance of Dr. Martin Luther King
This investigation examines the authorization for,
conduct and termination of, and deliberations
regarding the surveillance of Dr. King. This case
may involve specific allegations of abuses and other
controversial matters where there is reason to be-
lieve improprieties may have occurred.
1114
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the
Justice Department address the following specific
questions:
a.
b.
c.
a.
Through what procedures and by whom were
wiretaps and electronic bugs of Dr. King
initiated, approved, continued, and termina-
ted?
What were the locations, extent, and
duration of the electonic surveillances
of Dr. King?
What were the grounds of national security,
if any, for the introduction of the electronic
surveillances of Dr. King?
What was the relationship between the information
collected and each of the purposes of the
surveillance?
e. . What evaluations were made of the original
grounds. for the surveillance as it progressed?
i
f.
g.
What were the results of those evaluations?
Who made them?
h... What periodic evaluations were made of the
... relationship between the information being
collected and the original objectives of the
surveillance?
i. What were the results of the evaluations?
j.
Who made them?
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 42
:

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_39.jpeg ---
i
:
i
I
:
!
1
d.
e.'
•
Does the Fourth Amendment permit the
issuance of judicial warrants for elec-
tronic surveillance on grounds other than
ordinary probable cause where. national
security intelligence purposes are advanced
to justify the surveillance?
To what extent are the specific procedures.
of Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control
Act of 1968 inappropriate for electronic
surveillance conducted for national secu-
rity intelligence purposes?
Documents
The Committee requests the following additional
documents bearing on the questions stated above:
a.
All written justifications for the specific
authorizations by the Attorney General for
warrantless electronic surveillance from
January 1, 1960, until the present.
b. All documents reflecting the denial by the
Attorney General of specific requests for
warrantless electronic surveillance from
January 1, 1960, until the present.
c.
#
Committee staff access to information con-
tained in the impounded documents, deposi-
tions', and other materials in all pending
civil suits which involve warrantless
electronic surveillance and in which the
· Committee has received the consent of the
plaintiffs for such access.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
II
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 39
*
=
Task Force leader
Mike Epstein
H

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_4.jpeg ---
SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents)
-
3.-
I
These Working Group agencies set their own priorities
and parameters concerning intelligence on terrorism mat-
ters. From time to time the CIA requests comments from
the Working Group on its weekly terrorism reports.
The organization of the Cabinet Committee is de-
lineated in the President's memorandum of September 25,
1972. The Working Group is composed of senior repre-
sentatives of the ten agencies on the Cabinet Committee
and representatives of the following agencies: Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, Energy Research and
Development Administration, Federal Protective Service,
Immigration and Naturalization Service, Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration, Metropolitan Police Department,
National Security Agency, Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
Office of Management and Budget, and the United States
Information Agency. These additional agencies were in-
vited to participate in the Working Group by the Special
Assistant to the Secretary and Coordinator for Combatting
Terrorism (S/CCT), in his capacity as Chairman of the
Working Group.
Under the Working Group there is one formal sub-
group, the Behavioral Science Resource Group (BSRG),
which is composed of behavioral science experts from
the State Department, the CIA, the FBI and USIA. The
State Department member chairs BSRG. The Resource Group
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 4
:
SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents
i
F
F

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_43.jpeg ---
"
1
K.
To whom were any results of the
surveillance disseminated?
1. As to each person to whom information was
disseminated, please state
•
(1) The nature of the information.
(2) The basis for the dissemination.
(3) The date of each dissemination.
(4) The use which was in fact made of
the information.
Responsible staff:
Senior staff
Task Force Leader
Mike Epstein
"
11
NW-88326-Docld:329896-11-Page 43
TI
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_45.jpeg ---
:
I
I
1
+
1
1
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 45
(1) The nature of the information.
(2) The basis for the dissemination.
(3)
. (4)
The date of each dissemination.
The use which was in fact made of
the information.
Responsible staff:
Senior Staff
Task Force Leader
Mike Epstein
"I
"
*

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_48.jpeg ---
:
"
4+1
Documents
The Committee requests the following additional
documents bearing on the questions stated above:
1. All documents which discuss, refer to, or
relate to the origins, authorizations,
conduct, and termination of and procedures
for the mail covers, intercepts, and openings
...identified in 3 and 4 above.
Responsible Staff:
Senior Staff
Task Force Leader
Paul Wallach
"
11
al
"I
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 48
"
"I

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_44.jpeg ---
I
4:
:
8 m
Surveillance at the Democratic National
Convention, Atlantic City, 1964
The Committee is examining the use of
surveillance and other intelligence operations
in Atlantic City, New Jersey, on or about the
time of the Democratic National Convention in
1964. This case may involve specific allegations
of abuses and other controversial matters where
there is reason to believe improprieties may
have occurred.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
a.
b.
C.
Q.
Did the FBI conduct electronic surveillance
and other intelligence operations at this
time and place?
Who were the targets?
Through what procedures and by whom were the
decisions made to engage in electronic
surveillance and intelligence operations.
at this time and place?
What were the nature, extent, and duration
of the electronic surveillance and other
intelligence operations at this time and
place?
ˆè. What was the relationship between each target.
selected and the purpose of the surveillance?
f.. Was the FBI requested to conduct such
surveillance by any person or organization
outside the FBI?
8.
.
n.
1.
If so, by whom, when, and for what stated
reason?
To whom were the results of the surveillance
disseminated?
As to each person whom information was
disseminated, please state
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 44

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_49.jpeg ---
I
I
"
a
D
Other Specific Techniques
As to the following techniques, the Committee's
inquiry will initially be confined to the General
Questions. As the inquiry proceeds, areas of
potential abuse and thus of specific inquiry beyond
the General Questions may develop:
1. Incommunicado detention and interrogation.
2. Photographic and television surveillance.
3. Polygraphs.
4.
The obtaining of bank, credit, school, and
· other personal records and information,
including the obtaining of information under
false pretext.
www
M
NW-88326 Docld:32989611 Page 49
"
:
t
-x

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_46.jpeg ---
I
"
B.
"
"
Surreptitious Entry
The purpose of this inquiry is to determine the
extent to which the FBI has used surreptitious
entry as an intelligence technique, either through
its own operations or through operations by other
agencies and individuals. This case may involve
allegations of abuse and controversial matters
where there is reason to believe improprieties
may have occurred.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
1. What are the scope and basis of the claim of
Executive authority to conduct warrantless
surreptitious entry as asserted by the
Department of Justice in United States v.
Ehrlichman?
2.
What surreptitious entries have been carried
out by the FBI or by another government agency
with the knowledge of the FBI from January 1,
_ 1960, to the present? Please list by date,
place,and target.
3. As to any instance in which the FBI has refused
to comply with another agency's request for
surreptitious entry, what was
a.
0.
The basis for the refusal?'
The reason given for the request?
4. What procedures were employed to authorize any
surreptitious entry identified under 2, and who
authorized each such entry?
5.
To the extent applicable by their terms, each of
the above questions and the General Questions
will be explored specifically with reference to
any entry or proposed entry at an embassy in
May 1972.
Responsible Staff: Senior Staff
Task Force Leader
Mike Epstein
Paul Wallach
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 46
+

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_47.jpeg ---
I
I
t
. "
:
C.
Mail Covers and Mail Openings
The Committee is examining the conduct of mail covers
and mail openings by or on behalf of the FBI and any
instances of mail openings or intercepts which may
have been conducted by or on behalf of the FBI. This
inquiry may involve allegations of abuse or other
controversial matters where there is reason to
believe improprieties may have occurred.
Questions
"I
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
1... The specific purposes of all mail covers conducted
in connection with FBI intelligence and counter-
intelligence activities. This includes all
documents pertaining to FBI decisions to request
Postal Service mail covers and lists of all
subjects upon whom mail covers have been placed
as a result of FBI requests since January 1, 1960.
2. The procedures and practices for the dissemination
of information from mail covers requested by the
FBI. This includes a list of all entities to whom
mail cover information has been disseminated since
January 1, 1960.
3.
4.
.
•
Whether or not FBI personnel may have conducted
mail covers in violation of existing Postal Service
regulations. For any mail covers which may have
been conducted by FBI personnel or for the FBI by
-persons other than Postal Service employees, from
January 1, 1960, to the present: identify the '
physical locution where the mail cover was
conducted, the names of all persons who participated
in and authorized the mail cover, and a brief
explanation of the purpose of the mail cover and
why it was initiated.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 47
Whether or not the FBI has opened mail or caused
mail to be opened, either with or without the
permission of the Postal Service. For all
incidents of mail opening which may have been
conducted by FBI employees or by other persons
in cooperation with the FBI, from January 1,
1960, until the present: identify the physical
location where the mail as opened or intercepted,
the names of the individuals who participated in
the opening or intercept, and the purpose of the
opening or intercept.
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_5.jpeg ---
!
"
SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents)
- 4
-
has a mandate to seek to improve the United States'
response to acts of international terrorism through use
of behavioral science techniques.
End Statement
Attachments:
1.
2.
3.
George S. Springsteen
Executive Secretary
Memorandum of September 18, 1972
Memorandum of September 25, 1972
Six Reports to the President
"I
Drafted: S/CCT:JTBrowne: nwh
6/11/75 Ext 20831
KW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 5
"
Clearance: M - Mr. Eagleburger
-
INR
S/CCT
Mr. Kirk
-
Mr. Fearey
-SECRET
(CONFIDENTIAL When Separated
From Accompanying Documents)
}

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_51.jpeg ---
i
7.11
"
3.
· 4.
5.
6.
What were the purposes of each program?
In each case, by what means was it intended the
purpose would be accomplished?
What internal FBI procedures were adopted for
the consideration and approval of specific dis-
ruptive activities and for determining the
results of such activities?
As to each operation listed above, and any
others of a fundamentally similar kind, identify
by type the sources of the information used
against individuals and groups for disruptive
purposes.
7. As to each instance in which such information
was obtained through electronic surveillance
(a) What or who was the target of the sur-
veillance?
(b) Was the surveillance legal?
(c) Was the surveillance conducted pursuant to
warrant?
(Q) What were the dates of the surveillance?
.
8.
(e)
What were the precise means of surveillance?
(f)
Who authorized the surveillance (both
within and without the FBI)?
(g) What was the purpose of the surveillance?
As to each case listed above and all fundamen-
tally similar cases, what was the legality and
propriety of the distruptive activities? Should
any of the activities referred to in the above
sentence be forbidden by statute, considered
for future use, or otherwise subject to statu-
tory or administrative regulation?
•
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 51
:
11
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_52.jpeg ---
9.
10.
In what activities has the FBI engaged since
April 28, 1971, the purpose or effect of which
has been to disrupt domestic groups or discredit
U.S. citizens or which bear any other similarity
to the purposes or effects of COINTELPRO
activities?`
What restrictions, directives, or other measures
have been adopted by the FBI and the Justice
Department to limit or regulate the use of
such disruptive techniques?
The Committee will investigate all COINTELPRO and
disruptive activities identified above. On the basis
of a review of the summaries of COINTELPRO cases prepared
for the so-called Petersen Committee, as well as other
sources of information, the Committee will develop
further requests for information and documents.
Responsible Staff: Senior Staff
Task Force Leader
Les Seidel
Mike Epstein
Walter Ricks
NW 88326 'Docld:32989611 Page 52
:.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_50.jpeg ---
...
2.2 46
1
E.
COINTELPRO and Disruptive Activities
The Committee is investigating the circumstances
surrounding the origins of, authorization for, and
implementation of the FBI program known as COÏNTEL-
PRO and any similar programs. This inquiry may
involve allegations of abuse and controversial matters
(where there is reason to believe improprieties may
have occurred. The scope of this investigation
covers:
1. COINTELPRO
2. COINTELPRO
-
Communist Party USA;
Socialist Workers Party;
3. COINTELPRO White Hate Groups%3
4. COINTELPRO
Black Extremists;
New Left%3B
5. COINTELPRO
16. COINTELPRO -- Special Operations (except as
targeted against hostile foreign intelligence
services);
7. COINTELPRO
8. COINTELPRO
9.
-
Puerto Rican Independence Groups%3B
Operation Hoodwink
Any other activities of the FBI which have or
have had the purpose and effect of disrupting
domestic groups or discrediting U.S. citizens,
whether or not carried out under a COINTELPRO
program.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
·Department address the following specific questions:
11. Under what circumstances, through what proce-
2.
dures, and by whom were these programs initiated,
authorized, and terminated?
:
Under what circumstances and through what pro-
cedures did the FBI discover and report to the
Attorney General the existence of items 7 and 8
identified above and similar disruptive activities
not included in the original review of COINTELPRO
activities conducted by the Department of Justice
in 1974?
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 50
**

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_55.jpeg ---
I a
↑
1
1
6.
What limits, if any, have been placed on the
type of information which informants have been
intrusted to report back to the FBI?
7. What have been the annual percentage of
potential informants who became paid infor-
mants in connection with security, intelli-
gence, and counterintelligence matters, cases,
and programs from 1960 until the present?
Documents
Please provide a summary of ten cases (for each
of the following categories) where the FBI's use
of informants, sources, or undercover personnel
resulted in:
2.
2.
the conviction of an espionage agent of a
foreign government.
the prevention of the theft of national secu-
rity information.
"
3. the prevention of sabotage.
4.
the prevention of an act of violence.
5.
the prevention of the carrying out of a con-
spiracy to overthrow the government.
6.
any other successful preventive actions in
furtherance of the FBI's national security
responsibilities.
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mike Epstein
Jack Smith
Walter Ricks
Pat Shea
NW-88326-Docld:32989611 Page 55
I
Ir
$

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_53.jpeg ---
☑
I
IL
F. Clandestine Informant Activities
•
The Committee is examining all aspects of the
FBI's use of informants, sources, and undercover
personnel and the techniques employed by such per-
sons. Although informants are the single most
productive source of intelligence information, the
difficulties of controlling their activities may
increase the possibility of improper conduct. The
use of informants to infiltrate organizations also
may pose dangers to the right of associational pri-
vacy. Consequently, proposals have been made for
the imposition of a judicial warrant requirement
or other safeguards for the use of informants.
The Committee seeks to evaluate such proposals as
well as the contributions of informants to the
accomplishment of legitimate objectives.
In addition, the Committee is examining informant
activities with respect to several particular situa-
tions and cases. This investigation may involve
specific allegations of abuse or controversial
matters where there is reason to believe improprie-
ties may have occurred. The Committee's inquiry
covers the general circumstances surrounding the
following incidents or cases:
a.
Wounded Knee%;B
b. Kent State%3B
c. New York v. Stroble (Attica);
1
n
. d.
.e.
United States v. Buckalew (Gainesville);
United States v. Briggs (Camden);
"
. f.
New York v. Dillon (Hobart College);
g.
United States v. Marshall (Seattle).
IL
1
Additional cases may also be examined.
In addition to the above cases, the Committee is
examining the role of FBI informants in providing
information to the FBI concerning members of the
following organizations:
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 53

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_54.jpeg ---
**
a. Ku Klux Klan;
'b.
c.
Students for a Democratic Society;
Weathermen;
2.
Black Panther Party;
e.
Communist. Party USA;
1
f. W.E.B. DuBois Clubs.
Additional studies of informant activities with
respect to members of other organizations may be
formulated.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
1. With respect to both categories of cases listed
above, what allegations, whether unfounded or
not, of improper, illegal, unethical, or provoca-
tive conduct by FBI informants have been made in
connection with these situations or groups?
2.
What measures has the FBI taken to investigate
such allegations of misconduct and to prevent
such alleged misconduct from taking place in the
future?
3. What instructions has the FBI given to its in-
formants with respect to possible improper,
illegal, unethical, or provocative conduct?
4. What has been the largest number of informants,
sources, and undercover personnel in use at any
one time during each year from 1960 until the
present in connection with security, intelli-
gence, and counterintelligence matters, cases,
and programs?
5.
What has been the annual total amount of funds
(including reimbursement for expenses) paid to
informants and sources for each year from 1960
until the present?
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 54

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_56.jpeg ---
ļ
"
G.
.
"Notional" Organizations
The Committee is examining the FBI's alleged
creation of the support for "notional" organizations
for intelligence or counterintelligence purposes.
Although it may rely upon informants and other
clandeștine operatives, this alleged practice is
sufficiently novel to require separate attention.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
1. What groups, organizations, movements, or other
associations has the FBI caused directly or
indirectly to be formed or created for intel-
ligence or counterintelligence purposes? Please
provide a complete list from January 1, 1960,
to the present.
2.
•
What groups, organizations, movements, or
other associations has the FBI supported finan-
cially or materially? Please provide a complete
list from January 1, 1960, to the present.
3. In which cases has the FBI supported or created
such organizations in coordination or coopera-
tion with other agencies?
4. How have the presence of such "notional" organi-
zations affected the public's perception of the
movements of which they form a part?
5.
How have any FBI programs for the creation and
support of such groups been coordinated with
any similar programs undertaken by the CIA or
other U.S. intelligence agencies?
Responsible staff:
Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mike Epstein
NW-88326-Docid:32989611 Page 56
:.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_57.jpeg ---
1
I
.' H. Joint FBI-Police Operations
H
⋅
· The purpose of this inquiry is to examine certain
allegations that joint FBI-police operations re-
sulted in misconduct or abuse. These cases are
complex and involve a variety of techniques.
Nevertheless, they may indicate some of the most
serious problems which may arise in attempting to
deal with potentially violent situations.
1. The White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
Mississippi
The Committee is inquiring into the relation-
ships between the FBI and other law enforcement
agencies and private organizations in Mississippi
in connection with the White Knights of the
Ku Klux Klan. The purpose of the inquiry is to
determine what effect, if any, FBI activities
had on the actions of other law enforcement
agencies and private individuals with respect
to the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in
Mississippi. This investigation may involve
allegations of abuses or other controversial
matters where there is reason to believe impro-
prieties may have occurred.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the
Justice Department address the following
specific questions:
a.
D.
Was this organization a target of FBI
COINTELPRO operations?
If so, how and by whom was it selected as
a target?
.c. What were the purposes of any disruptive
operations directed at it?
a.
e.
-
To what extent were the purposes achieved?
What disruptive techniques, if any, were'
employed?
;
::
NW 88326 'Docld:32989611 Page 57

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_60.jpeg ---
-
"
j.
1
What techniques did the informants employ
to gather the information?
If
k.. Were the techniques used by the informants
all approved and monitored by the FBI?
not, which were not so approved?
1. What activities did the informants engage
in other than information gathering?
m.
n.
0.
What other methods and sources did the FBI
use to gather intelligence on the organiza-
tion?
If electronic surveillance was used, how
did the use of such surveillance relate to
each of the general questions?
To what extent was information on persons
and groups not members of or affiliated
with the Black Panther Party gathered,
stored, or disseminated by the FBI as a.
result of its investigations of the organi-
zation?'
-Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Walter Ricks
Chris Pyle
•
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 60
4

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_58.jpeg ---
I
f.
1
I
h
It
1
g.
h.
Over what period of time did the disrup-
tive activities occur?
What evaluations were made of their effects?
By whom were they made?
i. What were the results of the evaluations?
j.
k.
1.
m.
Were FBI informants used to infiltrate the
organization?
If so, what kinds of information did the
informants gather?
What activities did the informants engage
in other than information gathering?
Identify by date and names the persons
involved in all contacts the FBI had with
other law enforcement agencies and private
groups and individuals with respect to
alleged Klan bombings of Jewish synagogues
and the homes of Jewish leaders in Meridian,
Mississippi, during May August 1968.
Responsible staff:
-
Senior staff
Task Force leader
Jack Smith
Les Seidel
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 58
PL
$

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_59.jpeg ---
"
2.
AL
The Black Panther Party, Chicago
The Committee is inquiring into the relation-
ships between the FBI and other law enforce-
ment agencies in the Chicago area in connec-
tion with the Chicago chapter of the Black
Panther Party. The purpose of the inquiry is
to determine what effect, if any, FBI activities
had on the actions of other law enforcement and
intelligence agencies with respect to the Black
Panther Party in the Chicago area. This inves-
tigation may involve allegations of abuses or
other controversial matters where there is rea-
son to believe improprieties may have occurred.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the
Justice Department address the following
specific questions:
a. Was the Chicago chapter of the Black
Panther Party a target of FBI COINTELPRO
operations?
b.
c.
d.
If so, how and by whom was it selected as
a target?
What were the purposes of any disruptive
operations directed at it?
To what extent were the purposes achieved?
#
e. What disruptive techniques, if any, were employsit
f.
Over what ‘period of time did the disruptive
activities occur?.
g. What evaluations were made of their effects?
Docld:32989611
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 59
h.
By whom were they made?
1. If FBI informants were used to infiltrate
the organization, what kinds of information
did the informants gather?
t
20

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_61.jpeg ---
;
J
1
I.
:
"
:
:
The "Huston Plan"
The Committee is examining the FBI's role in the
disposition of the report of the Interagency Com-
mittee on Intelligence (Ad Hoc) in 1970. This
report as submitted to the President included cer-
tain options which were specifically identified as
"illegal". It purported to represent the joint
recommendations of all members of the U. S. intel-
ligence community, but FBI Director J. Edgar
Hoover disagreed in a series of footnotes.
The serious consideration given to such al-.
legedly illegal proposals gives this case
!
the utmost significance for the Committee's under-
standing of the risks of uncontrolled intelligence
activity. This case may involve specific allega-
tions of abuse and controversial matters where
there is reason to believe improprieties may have
occurred.
Questions
10
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
1. What contacts occurred between Tom Charles
Huston and personnel of the FBI and the Depart-
ment of Justice during 1969 and 1970? Identify
by date and names of persons involved.
2.
What was the purpose of each such contact?
3. With respect to any assistance provided to the
Interdepartmental Committee on Intelligence
(Ad Hoc) by personnel of the FBI:
a.
.b.
c.
Who were the FBI participants?
What kind of assistance was provided?
What was the role of the FBI in preparing
the various drafts of the special report
of the Committee?
NW 88326_ Docld:32989611 Page 61

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_62.jpeg ---
1
I
L
"
.4.
5.
What were the specific arguments, advanced
for the inclusion of the allegedly illegal
options in the special report submitted for
the President's consideration? Were other
allegedly illegal options considered and
rejected?
We're any measures taken by the FBI to imple-
ment specific elements of the Huston Plan?
This includes both the allegedly "illegal"
aspects and other provisions such as the
expanded recruitment of 18-21 year old infor-
mants.
.
6. What are the present views of the FBI and
the Department of Justice as to the legality
and propriety of the various options included
in the special report?
Responsible staff:
Senior staff
Task Force leader
Barbara Banoff
Loch Johnson
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 62
"
"
"

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_6.jpeg ---
The Deputy Attorney General
Director, FBI
REC-107
1 - Mr. Wannall - enc.
-
enc.
1 - Mr. Cregar - enc.
1 - Mr. Mintz
1 - Mr. Hotis - enc.
June 30, 1975
Ir. Daly - enc.
62-116395-33'8"
SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
Reference is made to memorandum of K. William O'Connor,
Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination, to Mr. John Mintz, Legal
Counsel Division of this Eureau, dated June 26, 1975, captioned "DAG
Inquiry Re Communication by Former AAG Doar to FBI Regarding
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Delegation.
"
Regarding your request contained in referenced communication
for the Bureau to locate and furnish certain documents, it is my under-
standing that you are in possession of the documents requested.
JUL 1 1975
-FBI
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE
BY
MAILED 6
In response to your request that we furnish our observations
concerning the making of the documents available to former Assistant
Attorney General John Doar, may I suggest that this raises an issue
which has been discussed in the past by the Bureau and the Department
-and other Government agencies. This issue to my knowledge has not
been resolved. That issue is whether a former employee should be
allowed access to documents in the Government's possession to refresh
his recollection for possible testimony before the Senate Select Committee.
It is this Bureau's position that such documents should not be made
available for the aforementioned purpose, and in those instances where
a former employee cannot respond accurately to the question of the Senate
Select Committee or any other Congressional investigative body, the
Committee or Congressional body can be referred to the appropriate
bureau or agency which will, if appropriate, furnish the necessary
information. I am sure you will understand our concern in this regard
Assoc. Dir. _ Insofar as setting a precedent which might serve for future requests of
this nature.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Direr's
A
Mr. Kliam O'Connor
Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination
PVD:ech
1(8)
1975
ich
MAIL ROOM ☑A
ON TELETYPE UNIT
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 6
SEARC
0063JER
Ž
SEE NOTE ON PAGE 2
(0%
JBA AM
wRW
PUD

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_65.jpeg ---
*IV. Department of Justice
The Committee is examining activities of divisions of
the Justice Department other than the FBI which perform
internal security and intelligence functions. The pur-
pose of these inquiries is to determine whether these
functions have been carried out in conformity with the
rule of law.
.A.
The Attorney General
5₁
The Committee is studying the functions of the
Attorney General with respect to the supervision
of and policy-making for internal security and
intelligence activities. The Committee seeks to
determine whether his duties are properly defined
and his office properly organized to perform
these functions effectively.
Questions
The Committee requests that the Justice Department
address the following specific questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
To what extent has the Attorney General been
involved in the consideration or approval of
the policies and activities of U. S. foreign
and military intelligence agencies?
Has the Justice Department made any agree-
ments with the CIA or any other U. S. intelli-
gence agency with regard to the investigation
or prosecution of agency personnel?
Under what circumstances and for what purposes
has the Office of Legal Counsel provided legal
advice to the Attorney General on matters per-
taining to foreign and domestic intelligence
activities?
To what extent has the Attorney General
authorized cooperation, including the exchange
of information and the conduct of joint opera-
tions, between the Drug Enforcement Administra-
tion or its predecessors and the CIA or other
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 65

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_64.jpeg ---
I
}
al
.7.
With respect to any so-called "secret files"
maintained within the FBI, including the
"official and confidential" and "personal and
confidential" files maintained by the executive
assistant to the FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover
on his behalf until the time of his death, the
Committee seeks to establish the contents of
such files, the circumstances surrounding the
transfer of a portion of such files within the
Bureau at the time of Director Hoover's death,
the transfer of a portion of such files to
"
Mr. Hoover's residence, the destruction of any
such files, the transfer of any such files from
Mr. Hoover's residence, the use of information
within such files, and their relationship to
the official investigative files of the FBI.
The Committee desires all information bearing
on these matters, including the results of
any inquiries conducted within the FBI and
the Department of Justice.
8. What measures have been taken to ensure that the
intelligence and investigative resources of the
FBI are not misused for political purposes or
personal advantage.
9.
What additional "measures should be taken?
Responsible Staff:
Senior Staff
Task Force Leader
Mark Gitenstein
NW-88326-Docld:329896-11-Page-64-
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_63.jpeg ---
J
J.
Alleged Political Misuse of the FBI
The Committee is investigating allegations that
the intelligence and investigative resources of
the FBI have been misused by various Presidents,
Attorneys General, Members of Congress, and FBI
executives themselves. This subject may involve
specific allegations of abuse and other contro-
versial matters where there is reason to believe
improprieties may have occurred.
Questions
The Committee requests that the FBI and the Justice
Department address the following specific questions:
Have persons outside the FBI sought the FBI's
assistance for partisan political purposes or
personal advantage? Please identify each
instance by the name of the person seeking to
so use the FRT, the date, and the nature of the
assistance sought.
2. In each such case, what has been the response
- of the FBI?
-
4
. 3. Have persons inside or outside the FBI sought
to employ the resources of the FBI for purposes
outside the FBI's authority? Please identify
each instance by the name of the person seeking'
to so use the FBI, the date, and the purpose
for which the person sought to use the FBI.
4.
5.
"
In each such case, what has been the response
of the FBI?
What measures has the FBI employed to
a.
b.
Respond to critics.
Affect the reputation or credibility of or
otherwise discredit critics.
6. What were the nature, purpose, duration, and
results of Project INLET involving preparation
of an intelligence letter for the President
and other Executive officials?
r
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 63
1
"
'

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_66.jpeg ---
m
x
intelligence agencies with respect to narcotics
intelligence?
5. What standards and procedures has the Attorney
General adopted for:
˚.6.
7.
-
a.. The collection, analysis, use, and dis-
semination of narcotics intelligence.
b.
c.
d.
The collection, analysis, use, and dis-
semination of organized crime intelligence.
The use of intelligence information by the
Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Law Enforcement Assistance Administration
grants for the support of state or local
police intelligence activities and intel-
ligence data systems.
To what extent have communications between the
White House and the FBI or other agencies
under the jurisdiction of the Attorney General
bypassed the Attorney General? To what extent
should such communications be channeled through
the Attorney General?
What have been the policies and procedures of
the Justice Department for evaluating the
budget requests of the FBI for intelligence
and counterintelligence activities?
Responsible staff:
Senior staff
Task Force leader
Mark Gitenstein
Barbara Banoff
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 66
P

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_68.jpeg ---
JI
"
b.
c.
d.
e.
What type of information has been stored
in readily retrievable form by the Unit
and Section?
To whom and for what reasons has intelli-
gence information been disseminated by
the Unit and Section?
What were the reasons for the submission
of IDIU computer printouts to the CIA, as
reportedly occurred in 1969?
To what extent did the Unit and Section
make specific requests to other agencies
within and outside the Justice Department
. for intelligence information?
.6. With respect to the use of grand juries by
the Special Litigation Section of the Internal
Security Division,
a. Have any allegations of misuse of the grand
jury process in cases handled by Special
Litigation Section attorneys come to the
attention of the Department? If so,
briefly describe each such allegation and
what, if any, action was taken by the
Department in response to such allegation.
D.
c.
To what extent, if any, did the use of
grand juries in cases handled by the Special
Litigation Section attorneys differ from the
use of grand juries in cases handled by
other sections of the Justice Department?
To what extent, if any, was information
obtained through the use of grand juries
included in the intelligence files of the
Interdivisional Intelligence Unit or the
Analysis and Evaluation Section?
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 68

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_69.jpeg ---
* "
F
AN
7.
What have been the practices and procedures
of the Internal Security Division and the
Departmental Security Office for advising the
Attorney General and other executive agencies
with regard to the Federal Employee Security
Program?
Responsible staff: Senior staff
Task Force leader
Barbara Banoff
NW-88326 Docld:32989611 Page 69
;
U

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_67.jpeg ---
"
"I
B.
I
•
The Internal Security Section (formerly Division)
. The Committee is examining the activities of the
Internal Security Section of the Justice Depart-
ment and its predecessor, the Internal Security
Division. These entities have supervised the
Department's internal security law enforcement
activities, coordinated certain interdepartmental
internal security policies, and engaged in the
collection, analysis, and dissemination of intelli-
gence.
Questions
The Committee requests that the Justice Department
address the following specific questions:
j.
2.
3.
Under what circumstances, if any, has the
Justice Department seriously considered prose-
cutions under the Smith Act and laws pertain-
ing to seditious conspiracy, rebellion, or
incurrection, or "subversive activities",
since January 1, 1960?
To what extent has FBI intelligence activity
provided valuable evidence for use in the
prosecution of specific federal crimes?
What have been the practices and procedures
for coordination of policy through the Inter-
departmental Committee on Internal Security?
4. What have been the practices and procedures
for the interdepartmental and interagency
evaluation of domestic intelligence and
domestic collection of foreign intelligence.
through the Intelligence Evaluation Committee
and its predecessors?
5.
With respect to the Interdivisional Intelli-
gence Unit and the Analysis and Evaluation
Section of the Internal Security Division,
a. What have been the practices and proce-
dures of the Unit and Section for the
gathering of intelligence?
NW-88326-Docld:32989611 Page 67

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_7.jpeg ---
The Deputy Attorney General
NOTE: According to referenced communication, Mr. Doar requested
to review a communication he caused to be sent while in the Department
asking for information concerning the Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Party Delegation. The Deputy Attorney General had asked that the
documentation concerning the request and our response be located and
furnished to him. The Department also asked our views as to whether
he should be given access to or delivered the documents for the purpose
of refreshing Doar's recollection.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 7
**
-2-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_70.jpeg ---
200
"
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
: Mr. W. R. Wannall
FROM
: W.
regar
SUBJECT: SENSTUDY 75
DECLAUSIFY ON: 25X
MDR-16
1
1
-
-
Mr. J. B. Adams
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
GUNNDENTIAL
1
DATE: 6/26/75
-
TT, TRÍORMACION CONTAINED
CLMAINICA
CLASSIFIED
NO SHORN
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin
**Comp. Syst.
SECRE
Mr. F. S. Putman
1 - Mr. W. A.
UL
Branigan
1 - Mr. L. F. Schwartz
ALL INATION CONTAINED
MEREIN IS UNCL 331 D'EXCEPT
WHERE SHOWN OTHERWISE:
On 6/26/75 James J. Angleton, former Chief,
Counterintelligence Operations, Central Intelligence Agency,
telephonically furnished the following information to
SA L. F. Schwartz.
()
*Ext Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
aboratory
Legol Boun
Plon. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
Angleton recently testified under oath before three
Senators and Staff Members of the Senate Select Committee (SSC).
He appeared without counsel. During his testimony, Angleton
was asked numerous questions concerning his knowledge of
Israeli capabilities to conduct intelligence collection in the
United States. Among the questions asked Angleton were questions
bearing on Israeli efforts to gather nuclear information in
the United States. Angleton indicated that the SSC apparently
is aware of Angleton's past close relationship with the Israelis,
and Angleton feels that the questions directed to him by the
SSC may be related to information provided to the Committee by
correspondent Tad Szulc who, according to Angleton, is writing
an article concerning Angleton's relationship with the Israelis
for Penthouse Magazine. Angleton understands that Szulc has
either testified or has been interviewed by the SSC.
Angleton stated that he avoided any direct answers
on the above questions by stating that any knowledge he might
have would be secondhand and fragmentary. He advised the SSC
that such questions might more properly be directed to the EBI
When asked who in the Bureau might be knowledgeable in this
62-116395
LFS:1hb/hb
(7)
Claechted by SP4 alw/alm
Classified
Peclassify on: CADR 10/31/89
C.A. #88-1826
JUL 11 1975
REC-84
SP1 ccc/Aen #88-1826
77/27/94
NW888326 Bocid:32989611 Page 70'
62-116395
3 JUL 10 1975
CONTINUED OVER
CIA INFO. IS UNCLASSIFIED
PER CIA REVIEW,
of 3/17/94
-
**
328

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_71.jpeg ---
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Senstudy 75
62-116395
CONFIDENTE
SECHEL
area, Angleton replied that he did not know but that he believed
the current senior Bureau official concerned with operational
matters to be Deputy Associate Director James B. Adams. (c)(u)
In addition, Angleton advised that certain questions
he was asked dealt with alleged Soviet attempts to infiltrate
the CIA and other agencies. Again, Angleton avoided a direct
answer and indicated that the FBI would be the appropriate
agency to direct such questions to. Finally, Angleton commented
that in the event the Bureau thought it desirable he would be
happy to personally brief the Director or other appropriate
Bureau official concerning his testimony. He commented that
he has not been asked to, nor has he offered to, brief William
Colby, Director of Central Intelligence, concerning his testimony
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. We are checking for any available information
in files concerning Israeli intelligence collection capabilities
in the United States. ] Results will be summarized in separate
memorandum.
2. It is not believed appropriate to request
Angleton to brief the Director or other Bureau official
concerning his testimony, particularly since Angleton has
not seen fit to brief his former superiors at CIA.
by the Bureau for a briefing by Angleton might be misconstrued
if it were to come to the attention of Colby or other CIA
officials.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 71
ame
A request
GHEIDENTIA
JBA
Pau
wRe
jam

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_76.jpeg ---
F
A
"
N
SEE INSTRUCTION'S ON REVERSE
BEFORE COMPLETING.
TO:
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE
Intelligence Community Staff
ATTN: Central Index
FROM:
FBI
SUBJECT: Abstract of Information Provided to Select Committees
1. HOW PROVIDED (check appropriate term. If a document was made available
for review but not transmitted, so note.)
2. DATE PROVIDED
7/3/75
DOCUMENT
BRIEFING
X
INTERVIEW
TESTIMONY
OTHER
3. TO WHOM PROVIDED (check appropriate term; add specific names if appropriate)
SSC
Memorandum furnished to the Attorney General with a
copy for forwarding to the White House
4.
5.
HSC
IDENTIFICATION (provide descriptive data for documents; give name or identification number of briefer,
interviewee, testifier and subject)
Memorandum reports results of interview by SSC Staff Members of
Harry E. Schafer and his spouse, Jill D. Schafer, formerly
confidential informants of the FBI.
IN RESPONSE TO (list date and item number if in response to formal request, other-
wise state verbal request of (name), initiative, subpoena, etc.)
6. CLASSIFICATION OF
INFORMATION (enter
U, C, S, TS or
Codeword)
NA
U
7. KEY WORDS (enter the appropriate key words from the list provided separately; if key words not listed are
used underline for emphasis)
See (8)
+
8. SUMMARY (see reverse side before completing this item)
Interview failed to provide SSC any significant information due
to an unfriendly atmosphere created by the participants resulting
in an early termination of the interview,
62-116395
SFP:1hb
(4)
ALL INFORMATION CO
HEREIN IS UNCLASS
DATE 11-13-2000 6.
MDRY 6
IN_
TREAT AS YELLOW
Wo
5-
Jule
ORIGINAL VIA LIAISON TO CENTRAL COMMUNITY INDEX IN
CONNECTION WITH SENSTUDY 75.
3791(6-75)
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 76
CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_72.jpeg ---
f
K
"
1
Mr. J. B. Adams
1
Mr. J. A. Mintz
1
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1
The Attorney General
1
1
PH
"
Mr
R. L. Shackelford
0:
- Mr. W. O. Creary 3, 1975
Mr. D. Ryan
Mr. P. W. Cook
enni
Assoc. Dir,
Dep. AD Adm. _
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
-
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun
Telephone Ri
Pirector
-
-
Director, FBI
3
U. S. SENATE_SELECT_COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIEŠ
Enclosed is the original of a memorandum
concerning a contact made by the Staff of captioned
Committee with Mr. Harry Eugene Schafer and his spouse,
Mrs. Jill D. Schafer. It is noted that the Schafers,
until March, 1975, served as confidential informants of
this Bureau. A copy of the memorandum is also enclosed
for forwarding to Mr. James A. Wilderotter, Associate
Counsel to the President.
Enclosures - 2
62-116395
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention:
1 - 134–16380
134-19699
PWC: dew tow
(13)
/- ENCLOSURE
Eps 1975 ROOM
8888
K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for
ALL INFORMATION CONTA
HEREIN IS UNCLAN
DATE 10-13-500 D. SP2 Aun/20
MDR-16
Intelligence Coordination
(Harry Eugene Schafer)
(Jill D. Schafer)
TELETYPE UNIT
Bocid:32989611 Page 72'
1
REC-107
=
62-116395-327
3 JUL 9 1975
A/115
E
.PL:
>
O'Conno
4-16380
4-19
UNRECORDED. COPY FILED IN
GPO 954-546
M

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_73.jpeg ---
definerers
1
1
1.
-
GIVE
Mr. J. B. Adams
Mr. J. A. Mintz
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 Mr. R. L. Shackelford
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
July 3, 1975
1 - Mr. D. Ryan
1 - Mr. P. W. Cook
U. S. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVE ENMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
CONTACT OF MR. HARRY EUGENE SCHAFER
AND HIS SPOUSE, HRS. JILL D. SCHAFER,
WITH STAFF EIER OF THE SSC
Mr. Harry Eugene Schafer and his spouse,
Mrs. Jill D. Schafer, served as confidential informants
of the FBI until March, 1975. Immediately prior to that
date they were identified as sources of the FBI by
Joseph Alfred Burton, a former confidential informant
of the FBI. Since his discontinuance as an FBI source
in July, 1974, Burton has been publicly attacking the
FBI for alleged improprieties and illegal activities.
Burton's charges are distorted and in some instances false.
ALL INFORATION CONTAIN.
INDE16
DATE 10-13-2000
HEREIN IS UNCLASSI
caf
Assoc. Dir.
On May 21, 1975, Mr. and Mrs. Schafer made
available to our New Orleans Office a copy of a letter
addressed to them dated May 14, 1975, signed by Michael T.
Epstein, Counsel, of the SBC. In this letter Mr. Epstein
requested the Schafers telephone him collect to discuss
some matters relating to the current SSC inquiry.
Subsequently, Mr. and Mrs. Schafer voluntarily
contacted the New Orleans Office of the FBI to advise that
at the invitation of Mr. Epstein they had traveled to
Washington, D. C., on June 7, 1975, to converse with
representatives of the SSC. Mr. and Mrs. Schafer indicated
Mr. Epstein had offered to reimburse them for the expenses
Dep. AD Adm of this travel. The Schafers advised that upon their arrival
In Washington, D. C., at the appointed hour, they went to
Admin. Mr. Epstein's office. Mr. Epstein introduced himself and two
colleagues, a male named Harshal Elliott, described as a
Files & Com. representative of Senator Schweiker, and Mary De Oreo, a
female researcher.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
-
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection 1 134-16380 (Harry Eugene Schafer)
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
-
1.
-
-
PNC: dew/røm
HEHEN
134-19699 (Jill D. Schafer)
(12)
ORIGINAL AND ONE COPY TO THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL
Legal Coun.\
W
Telephone Rim
Director Sec
MAIL ROOM
TELETYPE UNIT
Pu
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 73
SEE NOTE PAGE THREE
ENCLOSURE
327.
62-11637329
569-920
GPO
Training

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_75.jpeg ---
SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
RE: CONTACT OF MR. AND MRS. SCHAFER WITH STAFF MEMBERS OF SSC
According to the Schafers, Mr. Epstein and his
colleagues gave the clear impression that they wore disappointed
and annoyed with the Schafers' reluctance to tell them anything.
Mr. Epstein asked if the Schafers wanted to talk to any of
the Senators and the Schafers stated they would be willing
to speak to Senator Goldwater; however, Mr. Epstein made no
specific arrangements other than to check with Charlie Lombard,
Goldwater's representative. Mr. Epstein did not say if the
Schafers would be subpoenaed; nor were any fira arrangements
mado about reimbursing them for their expenses. According to
the Schafers, the meeting broke up rather abruptly and
Mr. Epstein's colleagues left without saying good-by.
The Schafors stated they made an effort to be
friendly, cooperative and amenablo to Mr. Epstein and his
colleagues, and they made a good faith gesture in appearing
before Mr. Epstein in Washington, D. C.
NOTE:
The Schafers, as paid informants, furnished
information from October, 1969, until March, 1975, to the
Bureau. Information in this LHM was contained in
New Orleans teletype to the Director, dated June 11, 1975.
Several personal statements made by the Schafers, such as
"bearded hippy" in reference to one of Epstein's colleagues,
were not included in the LHM as this type of information
is not fully germane and our reporting of it might be
inferred as our being prejudicial.
KNM 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 75

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_77.jpeg ---
"
INSTRUCTIONS
Type or print clearly in ink.
Indicate classification of the abstract top and bottom.
Date the abstract and put on any internal control numbers required.
• "FROM" entry should clearly identify the organization providing the
information.
If additions (as when a copy of document sent to SSC is later sent to
HSC) or changes to a previously submitted form are necessary, submit a
copy of the original abstract, with the change indicated.
SPECIFIC ITEM NO. 8. SUMMARY - enter brief narrative statement describing
substance of information and showing relationship to Intelligence Community
matters if appropriate. Any feedback or evidence of investigatory interests
should be noted. Commitments made to supply additional information should be
noted. Additionally, certain administrative information may be entered here,
e.g., restrictions on review of a document, if document was paraphrased, whether
interviewee is current or former employee, etc. If actual document or transcript
is provided, that fact should be noted and no summary is required.
pages may be attached if necessary.
Additional
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 77
;

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_74.jpeg ---
}
SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
CONTACT OF MR. AND MRS. SCHAFER WITII STAFF MEMBERS OF SSC
According to the Schafers, Mr. Epstein began the
interview with the Schafers by stating the purpose of the
Senate Committee and why the Schafers were asked to Washington,
D. C. Mr. Epstein stated that the Committoo was trying to
develop information on what the U. S. intelligence agencies
have been doing, what changes in these agencies are needed
and "where mistakes might have happened."
The Schafers advised they requested Mr. Epstein to
ask them specific questions. He asked them what was the
entire period of time of the Schafers' relationship with the
FBI and if they were still associated with the Bureau.
Mr. Schafer told Mr. Epstein that he was not going to admit
any association with the FBI at this point and the reply seemed
to greatly upset Ifr. Epstein. He asked the Schafers why they
had come to Washington, D. C. The Schafers replied they
wanted to establish some groundwork for any relationship with
the Senate Committee. Mr. Epstein attempted to have the
Schafers relate their activities in behalf of the FBI,
Mr. Schafer advised they refused to comply due to Mr. Epstein's
manner and presentation. The Schafers stated they received
the definite impression that Mr. Epstein and his colleagues
expected to hear an afternoon of interesting stories and
anecdotes.
Mrs. Schafer told Mr. Epstein that they had done
nothing wrong, illegal, immoral or unethical in their
"movement" activities and they were proud of thoir contributions
to the nation's internal security. The Schafers related they
enjoyed a happy relationship with the FBI and they knew of
nothing questionable or unprofessional regarding the Bureau's
handling of their information. The Schafors said they made
it clear that they would be happy to tell the SSC these
things; however, since they were not reassured by Mr. Epstein,
and wore in fact put off by his manner and his colleagues
brusque reactions, they would not furnish anything further
to Mr. Epstein. The Schafers stated that short of appearing
before the Senate Committee, they wanted to bo left alone.
* A
NM 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 74

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_78.jpeg ---
inte
:
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA FPMR (41 CFR) 101–11.6
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
Mr. J. B. Adams
FROM
Legal Counsel
SUBJECT:
SENSTUDY 75
DATE: 7-2-75
WRW,
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident
inspection
Kinfell.
Laboratory
Legal Conne
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
-
-
The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Activities requested a staff interview with former Special
Agent David E. Todd about COINTELPRO and the investigation
at San Francisco of the Black Panther Party.
At the direction of Bureau teletype 6-9-75, San
Francisco on 6-11-75, advised Todd of above and that he was
released from the applicable employee secrecy agreement for
the purpose of the Staff interview.
By letter dated June 11, 1975, Mr. Todd said the
interview "may involve information disseminated to other
Government agencies under security classification and may
touch on foreign policy as well."
Mr. Todd asked:
1.
For written confirmation of the release given
him orally as well as a release from the provisions of any
applicable executive orders;
2. If there is "any limitation on the scope of the
material" he may release; and
MDR-16
ALIITTORIC
HEREIN IS UN
DATE 10-11-20
3. Whether he will be permitted to "refresh my
recollection by reviewing official files prior to or during
the interview."
Enclosure
1 Mr. Adams
1
-
-
1
-
1
-
1
-
1
-
1
-
Mr. Wannall
Mr. Cregar
-
62-116395-326
-
Enc.
Enc.
Enc.
REC-107
3 JUL 9 1975
Mr. Mintz Enc.
-
Mr. Hotis Enc.
-
Mr. Daly Enc.
-
-
Personal File Special Agent David E. Todd Enc.
1 – Mr. Miller
-
JDM: PVD:eek
(10)
u
-D
Enc.
(CONTINUED
-
OVER)
Oper
24 Jaffe 1 1975
Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan
NWWW 883260-Docid:32989611 Page 78

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_80.jpeg ---
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 80
DAVID E TODD
20 COZZOLINO DR
MILLBRAE CA
94030
Curmail
"
BY
CA#75-6203
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED.
HEREIN, IS UNCLASSIFIED
1
1
Mr. Clarence M. Kelley,
Director
Federal Bureau of Investigation
U. S. Department of Justice
Washington, D. C.
20535

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_79.jpeg ---
1
1
Legal Counsel to Adams, Memo
SENSTUDY 75
Re:
We have prepared an airtel to San Francisco with an
enclosed letter for Mr. Todd in response to his request. We
are having the San Francisco Office hand deliver the letter
so that any questions he may have can be answered.
We have not regarded requests for interviews as
"demands" within the meaning of 28 CFR 16.22; therefore, no
release from the Department is necessary.
Regarding his request for access to Bureau files,
we have not had former employees make this request previously.
Our position should be that they not have access but rather
rely on their recollection. If they cannot answer a specific
question, the Committee can be referred to the Bureau.
RECOMMENDATION:
Attached Airtel with enclosed letter to Mr. Todd
be approved and sent.
mee
- 2 -
KW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 79
fot
wRw
n

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_81.jpeg ---
:)
FO.
RECEIVED
Jun 18 5 18 PM 1975
LEGAL COUNSEL
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 81
"
ON
REC. 107
820 JUN 17.75
62-116395-325
3 JUL 9 1975

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_8.jpeg ---
T OF
MENT
PARTM
DOMINA
JUSTITIA
JUSTIC
SEQUITU
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20530
JUN 26 1975
REVOLUTION
AMERICAN
BICENTENNIAL
TO: John Mintz
Legal Counsel Division
Federal Bureau of Investigation
0
Senstrty
OM. K. William O'Connor
Special Counsel for Intelligence
Coordination
SUBJECT: DAG Inquiry Re Communication by Former AAG Doar
to FBI Regarding Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Party Delegation
→
*
·75°
(1) The DAG has asked me to request that the Bureau make
a file check to determine what, if any, documents may be found
in FBI files relating to a request made by Mr. Doar in August
1964 for information and Bureau action regarding members of the
subject delegation. It is our understanding that Mr. Doar
requested certain information from the FBI regarding this dele-
gation in mid-August 1964; and that some information was delivered
to the DOJ (either to Mr. Doar or then DAG Katzenbach) shortly
thereafter, in the latter part of August 1964.
(2) It is possible that Mr. Doar may be asked about these
matters in connection with the Senate Select Committee inquiry
(reference Appendix D, Item 7, 5/14/75 SSC request). The DAG
has also asked that, after such documentation as may be developed
under (1) above has been located, the Bureau furnish to him its
view as to the access/delivery to Mr. Doar of such documentation
for the purpose of refreshing his recollection.
(3) An expeditious response to this request will be
REC- 107
appreciated.
Memo to Me
6/30/75, PUD
7
Jommittee eit
nee
stice
1776-1976
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 8
FBI
4
62-116395-338
14 JUL 10 1975
ALL INFORMATION CONTA
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIE
DATE 10-16-2000 BY SPRAUM/
MDR-16
2

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_83.jpeg ---
i
July 2, 1975
airtel
To:
From:
SAC, San Francisco (62-6887)
Director, FBI (62-116395)
Subject: SENSTUDY 75
CA#75-6203
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
TAPIRE
DATE 11/30/83 BY SP-STAPI,
Assoc. Dir.
ReButel June 9, 1975.
Enclosed is a letter from the Director to former
Special Agent David B. Todd. You, an ASAC, or Senior Supervisor
please hand deliver enclosed letter to Mr. Todd immediately.
You are reminded of a memorandum to all employees,
Re: “INTERVIEWS OF FBI EMPLOYEES," in which the Director
advised this Bureau has pledged its cooperation with the Congress.
Enclosure
1-Mr. Adams
1-Mr. Wannall ·
1-Mr. Cregar.
1- Mr. Mintz
1-Mr. Hotis
1-Mr. Daly
1
1-Personal File Special Agent David E. Todd
l-Mr. Miller
PVD:1gp
(12)
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
-
-
Laboratory fir
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun
Telephone Rm.
irector Sec'y
-ly
#
¡ENCLOSURE
MAILED 6
JUL 3 1975
-FBI
som
MAIL ROOM
TELETYPE.UNIT 1
"
NW 882264 Doud:329896-112 Page 83
REC-107
"1
**
62-116395-324
116 11636-324
02
3 JUL 9 1975
BN
į
GPO 954-546
4

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_84.jpeg ---
Mr. David E. Todd
20 Cozzolino Drive
Millbrae, California
Dear Mr. Todd:
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
Mr. Adams
Mr. Wannall
Mr. Cregar
Mr. Mintz
Mr. Hotis
1
-
1 - Mr. Daly
July 2, 1975
Personnel File Special Agent
David E. Todd
Mr. Miller
1
-
1
-
94030
Thank you for your letter of June 11, 1975.
You are released from the FBI Employment Agreement
for the purpose of a Staff interview by the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence Activities concerning COINTELPRO
and the investigation at San Francisco, California, of the
Black Panther Party.
I am not aware of any other release you may require.
Pursuant to your request of June 11, 1975, a
Special Agent will be available during the interview to
assist you in making a determination whether or not a
response should be made to a particular question. This
agent is not to be considered private counsel and he will
not be present during the interview.
interview.
FBI files will not be made available for the
CA#75-6203
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 11130183 BY SP-TAP/RBG
My
Sincerely yours,
ENCLOSURE
REC- 107
62
324
Clarence M. Kelley
Director
3 JUL 9 1975
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
1
JDM:PVD:eek
(13)
NOTE:
PLM
Former SA Todd signed a secrecy agreement with the Bureau on
12-3-62.
com
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
MAIL ROOM ☑
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 84
.
TELETYPE UNIT
70
GPO 931-546

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_86.jpeg ---
I
CODE
TO SACS ATLANTA·
BIRMINGHAM
ALBANY
JACKSONVILLE
NK
1 - M J. B. Adams
Mr. J. A. Mintz,
(1- Mr. J. B. Hotis)
NITEL
1 - Mr. J. Cochran, Jr.
2
TELETYPE
KNOXVILLE
JUNE 27, 1975
ONAI
LOS ANGELES PERSONAL ATTENTION
TAMPA (Attn: T. J. Brownfield)
Mr. W. M. Mooney
CHICAGO
1
1
-
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 - Mr. R. L. Shackelford
1 - Mr. W. O. Cregar
1 - Mr. S. F. Phillips
FROM DIRECTOR FBI (62-116395)
PS
SENSTUDY 75
REBUTEL MAY 2, 1975.
2
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm.
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
-
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
--
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Legal Coun.
INQUIRIES MADE OF BUREAU BY SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE (SSC)
CONCERNING A NUMBER OF PRESENT AND FORMER FBI EMPLOYEES,
INCLUDING THEIR CURRENT WHEREABOUTS, SUGGESTS THEY MAY BE
INTERVIEWED BY SSC STAFF CONCERNING BUREAU'S FORMER INVESTIGA-
TION OF MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. SET OUT BELOW ARE NAMES AND
LAST KNOWN ADDRESSES OF FORMER BUREAU EMPLOYEES AND OFFICE OF
ASSIGNMENT OF INCUMBENTS, ALL OF WHOM SSC HAS INQUIRED ABOUT.
EACH OF THESE FORMER EMPLOYEES IS TO BE IMMEDIATELY
CONTACTED AND ALERTED THAT HE MIGHT BE APPROACHED BY THE SSC
STAFF ABOUT THE KING INVESTIGATION. THEY SHOULD BE TOLD THAT
ENCLOSURE 1
IN THE EVENT THEY ARE INTERVIEWED AND DURING THE COURSE OF
SFP:1hb
(11)
-
KEGFIACO
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
COMMUNICATIONS, SECTION
JUN 27 1975
7:2 CAM
TELETYPE
REC-107
62-116395-322
SEE NOTE PAGE 3
ALL INFORMATION CENTWED
LEREIN IS UNCLASSIFI
DATE 10-11-2000 BY SPRAUNP
MDR-16
3 JUL 9 1975
woe
An
Telephone Rm.
-
Director Sec'y
MAIL ROOM
-
NW8426J Db.cid: $2989811 Page 86
TELETYPE UNIT
1
GPS
951-346

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_85.jpeg ---
TO
W
FROM:
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA FPAIR (41 CFR) 101-11.6
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
Mr. W. R. Wannall WZW/THE
W. 0/10 Regar woo/45
we
1
1
1
SUBJECT:
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
MDP-16
DATE 10-17-2000 BY
84
1 1975.
SENSTUDY 75
-
-
Mr. J. B. Adams
Mr. J. A. Mintz
Mr. W. V. Cleveland
DATE: 6/27/75
1
Mr. W. R. Wannall
1 -
Mr. W. O. Cregar
1
-
Mr. L. F. Schwartz
former
On 6/27/75 James J. Angleton, former Chief,
Counter Intelligence Operations, Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA), telephonically advised SA L. F. Schwartz
that he has been in contact with Herbert Itkin,
Bureau Criminal Informant who also had a relationship
with CIA. Angleton advised that Itkin is being inter-
viewed today at a local hotel by a Mr. Shea from the
Senate Select Committee.
774
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm
Dep. AD inv.
Asst. Dir
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intelf.
Laboratory
Legal Cogn
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
Itkin was successfully operated as a Top Echelon
Criminal Informant from April, 1963, until February, 1968,
when he was discontinued. He has testified in a number
of Bureau cases and his past relationship with CIA and
the Bureau has been publicized. We have not been in
contact with Itkin for several years.
2
Angleton advised that he expects that Itkin will
contact him some time after completion of his interview
and if Angleton learns any information of interest to
the Bureau he will advise us.
for
Angleton also commented that he is being inter-
viewed himself today by Senate Select Committee representa-
tives regarding his knowledge of the "Huston Report."
ACTION:
LFS:adn
(7)
For information.
62-116395
1
i
"
FLM
REC-107
K
323
62-116395-86
3 JUL 9 1975)
Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan
NW 88326-Docid:32989611 Page 85
75)
W
-
-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_82.jpeg ---
:
20 Cozzolino Drive
'Millbrae, California 94030
June 11, 1975
Mr. Clarence M. Kelley
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D. C.
Dear Mr. Kelley:
Senstudy 75
On this date Supervisor Berryman of the San Fran-
cisco Office read to me a teletype to the effect the Bureau
had approved a secrecy release for me to respond to questions
from Senate investigator Lester B. Seidel in connection with
a Senate Select Committee on Internal Security investigation
of the CoIntelPro as it related to the Black Panther Party.
A copy of a letter from me to Mr. Seidel has been furnished
to the Bureau previously.
At the time I was designated supervisor of the squad
handling internal security investigations of the Black Panther
Party (RPP), the BPP was international in scope; Eldridge
Cleaver and others had been granted asylum in Algeria; the
BPP had support and/or branches in France, Germany, Scandinavia
and China. Aspects of the counter intelligence program
approved by the Bureau of which I am aware were directed against
some BPP foreign operations. Thus, interrogation by the Senate
investigator may involve information disseminated to other
government agencies under security classification and may
touch on foreign policy as well.
Therefore, prior to furnishing information obtained
in an official capacity to Mr. Seidel, who according to the
Bureau's teletype will be in San Francisco in about two weeks,
I would like written confirmation of the release which was
furnished me orally, preferably an official document covering
any secrecy agreement made with the Bureau as well as releasing
me from the provisions of any applicable executive orders which
preclude disclosure of official information without approval of
the Attorney General or an authorized Departmental officer.
I would also appreciate being advised if there is any limitation
on the scope of the material which I may release.
Since the Bureau's teletype also approved a secrecy.
release for current SAC Charles Bates, this presupposes he
will be authorized to furnish Mr. Seidel with the contents of
files if Mr. Seidel so requests. Therefore, I would also
appreciate advice as to whether I will be permitted to refresh
my recollection by reviewing official files prior to or during
the interview with Mr. Seidel.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-11-2000 BY.
97-2001
cc: SAO San Francisco
84 JUL 21 1975.
NW 88026 DocId: 32489611 Page 82
Sincerely yours,
David E. Todd'
Retired Special Agent
EC
THREE

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_89.jpeg ---
PAGE FOUR 62-116395
NOTE CONTINUED:
-
of the names were misspelled but we have been able to fairly
well establish that the individuals they are interested in
are those listed above. Included in the list were the
following supervisors presently assigned at FBIHQ: William D.
Campbell Laboratory, Joseph H. O'Rourke - Training Division
and Timothy Dorch - INTD. The caution taken herein in
alerting former employees, as well as incumbents, is same we
have taken by previous teletypes to selected SACs. After
dispatch instant teletype, copies will be filed in personnel
files of all named herein. The referenced 5/2/75 teletype
was to all offices furnishing background regarding Senstudy 75.
We are separately handling necessary response to the SSC.
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 89
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_88.jpeg ---
I
1
× 1
PAGE THREE 62-116395
ATLANTA: INCUMBENTS
DONALD P. BURGESS, RICHARD E.
FUGATT, EDMUND F. HAGGERTY, O. RICHARD HAMILTON, CHARLES T.
HAYNES, WILBUR W. SEITZER, ROBERT W. THOMSON. FORMER
MARION E. CHEEK, 1613 GAIL AVENUE, ALBANY, GEORGIA 31705;
CHARLES T. HARDING, 2243 PINECLIFF DRIVE, NORTHEAST, ATLANTA,
GEORGIA 30345.
BIRMINGHAM: LAWRENCE T. GURLEY, 1340 WESTMINISTER
PLACE, BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA 35235.
ALBANY: HENRY G. ROWSE, JR., 39 NORTH MAIN STREET,
ENOSBURG FALLS, VERMONT 05450.
JACKSONVILLE: WILLIAM LEE BOLYARD'
-
INCUMBENT.
KNOXVILLE: W. JOHN BENTON INCUMBENT.
LOS ANGELES:
1
h
JAMES M. KELLOGG
145
INCUMBENT.
TAMPA: JAMES E. MCMAHON, 3110 COCOS ROAD, TAMPA,
FLORIDA 33618.
NOTE:
CHICAGO: JOHN BASSETT INCUMBENT.
Legal Counsel Division has obtained an advanced
copy of a letter dated 6/24/75 from John T. Elliff of the
SSC Staff to K. William O'Connor of the Deputy AG's Office
(copy attached) which makes reference to prior SSC requests
concerning the King investigation and asks for the present
offices of assignment or last known addresses of 19 individuals.
The list had 21 names, two of which were duplicates. Several
NOTE CONTINUED PAGE 4
KNMV 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 88
1

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_87.jpeg ---
I
PAGE TWO 62-116395
SAME, QUESTIONS ARE ASKED WHICH RELATE TO SENSITIVE BUREAU
OPERATIONS (SOURCES, METHODS, TECHNIQUES, THIRD AGENCY RULE
AND ONGOING INVESTIGATIONS), THEY MAY REQUEST THAT AN FBI
AGENT BE PRESENT. BUREAU WILL PROVIDE AGENT ON REQUEST OF
INTERVIEWEE. AS A PRELUDE TO INTERVIEW, THE FORMER EMPLOYEE
MAY, AFTER BEING CONTACTED BY SSC STAFF, CONTACT BUREAU'S
LEGAL COUNSEL DIVISION BY COLLECT CALL FOR FULL INFORMATION
TO ASSIST HIM, INCLUDING OBLIGATIONS AS TO CONFIDENTIALITY
OF INFORMATION ACQUIRED AS FBI EMPLOYEE. IT IS EMPHASIZED
THAT BUREAU'S OFFER OF ASSISTANCE IS NOT INTENDED TO IMPEDE
SSC WORK BUT IS DONE AS COOPERATIVE GESTURE AND TO SAFEGUARD
SENSITIVE BUREAU INFORMATION. CONTACTS WITH THESE FORMER
EMPLOYEES TO BE HANDLED PERSONALLY BY SAC OR ASAC. IN EVENT
THIS NOT FEASIBLE FOR JUST CAUSE, TO BE HANDLED BY A SENIOR
SUPERVISOR.
INCUMBENT EMPLOYEES TO BE ADVISED THAT IF CONTACTED BY
SSC STAFF FOR INTERVIEW, LEGAL COUNSEL DIVISION TO BE
IMMEDIATELY NOTIFIED THROUGH SAC.
IMMEDIATELY AFTER CONTACT, RESULTS SHOULD BE FURNISHED
BUREAU BY TELETYPE IN ABOVE CAPTION. IF A FORMER EMPLOYEE IS
NO LONGER IN YOUR TERRITORY OR TEMPORARILY AWAY, SET OUT LEAD
NW 88326 DocId;2989611Page ICE IMMEDIATELY WITH COPY TO FRI HEADQUARTERS.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_90.jpeg ---
OFFICE OF THE
DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL
!
TO: Paul Daly
FROM: Bill O'Connor
JUSTIT
17
June 26, 1975
Please obtain the requested
addresses and return to me in a form
to be provided to the SSC.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 90
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
DATE 10-11-2000 EYS
MDR-16
ENCLOSURE
--
1
"
62-416395-322

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_9.jpeg ---
1
{
CONFIDENTIAL
12
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. No. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
1 Mr. J. B. Adams
-
2 - Mr. J. A. Mintz
(Mr. J. B. Hotis)
6/11/75
&
TO
Mr. W. R. Wanna
dunia
1
le
: W. regar
FROM
1
1
DATE:
-
-
-
SUBJECT: UNITED STATES SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES (SSC)
Mr. W. R. Wannall
Mr. W. O. Cregar
Mr. R. L. Moore
&
.. C/A
By letter dated 5/14/75, with attached appendices,
the SSC requested certain information and documents from
the FBI.
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm
Dep. Abany.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Laboratory
✓✓
Legal Coun.
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
Appendix C, Item number 10, requested all memoranda,
and other materials relating to the elimination of the Liaison
Section of the FBI in 1970 and its reestablishment in late
1972.
Among the enclosures to our letter to the Attorney
General (AG), dated 6/13/75, being proposed for forwarding
to the Committee is E. S. Miller memorandum to Mr. Felt,
7/14/72. On page 2 there is information that "our close
association with the Chief Postal Inspector and his top
officials has resulted in that agency providing support in
some of our most delicate intelligence operations looking
to the identification of illegal hostile intelligence
activities in this country." This could possibly be construed
to include opening of mail. It is to be noted that opening
of mail by FBI is the subject of a separate SSC request and
future correspondence with the SSC, through the AG, will
address itself to this subject. Former Chief Postal Inspector
Henry B. Montague, with whom we have had extensive dealings
in the past, is scheduled to appear before the full SSC on
6/12/75 and it is expected that he will be questioned about
possible FBI participation in mail openings.
RLM:mam
(7) B
RLM
TECLASSIFIED BY
REC- 107 62-116395-337
SBAUN/RP
10-16-2000
MDR-14
3 JUL 11 1975
CONTINUED OVER
6/74/75
Classified by 628
Exempt from SDS, Category 3
84 Jue of Decisification Indefinite
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 9
CUNTIDENTIAL
14
5-616
R. Kipprise
-
-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_92.jpeg ---
K. William O'Connor, Esq.
Page Two
•
is a
L
June 24, 1975
-
-
All of these individuals are believed to possess informa-
tion relevant to the Martin Luther King matter. With the
exception of Mr. Gurley and Mr. Campbell, all of these per-
sons are believed to have served at either the Atlanta or
Albany, Georgia, office of the FBI. We understand that
Mr. Gurley and Mr. Campbell were at one time assigned to
headquarters.
It would be most helpful if this information could be pro-
vided telephonically to Mr. Michael T. Epstein of our staff.
Sincerely,
Jalinit Ellipt
John T. Elliff
Director
Domestic Intelligence Task Force
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 92
4
11

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_94.jpeg ---
Memorandum to Mr. W. R. Wannall
Re: Senstudy 75
62-116395
packages were reviewed by Section Chief William O. Cregar
and Special Agents Leon F. Schwartz and Thomas J. McNiff
in Room 4123 JEH.
Material contained therein runs the entire gambit
from CIA cooperation, and in some instances financing, of
Bureau sensitive operations in foreign intelligence field,
to CIA involvement in domestic affairs including cooperation
with police departments and other Federal agencies. In all,
it was determined that approximately 174 pages of the document
contain information which in some respect has a bearing on
this Bureau's operations.
Pertinent page numbers were identified to
Mrs. Mowitt and she is taking this Bureau's request for these
pages back to CIA Headquarters for the purpose of obtaining
authorization to furnish this Bureau with copies of the
pages in which this Bureau is interested. Mrs. Mowitt
advised that she would insure our request in this respect
received expeditious attention and she will furnish us with
the results at the earliest time.
RECOMMENDATION:
None. Above submitted for information. You will
be kept advised of developments.
TJM
LFS
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 94
Ame
Jona
- 2.
1
Per
Jam

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_91.jpeg ---
FRANK CHURCH, "IDAHO, CHAIRMA
JOHN G. TOWER, TEXAS, VICE CHAIRM
FILIP. HART, MICH.
WALTER F. MONDALE, MINN.
WALTER D. MIDDLESTON, KY.
ROBERT MORGAN, N.C.
GARY HART, COLO.
HOWARD H. BAKER, JR., TENN.
BARRY GOLDWATER, ARIZ,
CHARLES MC C. MATHIAS, JR., MD.
RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, PA,
WILLIAM G. MILLER, STAFF DIRECTOR
FREDERICK A. O. SCHWARZ, JR., CHIEF COUNSEL
CURTIS R. SMOTHERS, MINORITY COUNSEL
t
United States Senate
SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
(PURSUANT TO S. RES. 21, 94TH CONGRESS)
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20510
June 24, 1975
4
RECEIVE
JUN 2 1975
OLL
K. William O'Connor, Esq.
Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination
Office of the Deputy Attorney General
U. S. Department of Justice
Washington, D. C. 20530
Dear Mr. O'Connor:
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
ED
HEREIN IS UNL
DATE 10-11-2000 & SP2 Aun/B48
MORIC
Pursuant to our telephone conversation of this date, I am.
making the following request which relates to matters
originally covered in Appendix D, items 5, 6, 9, 13, and
20.
Please provide the present offices of assignment or last
known addresses of the following agents or former agents
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation:
NotETO Paul Day
Pls dotain the rquetal
addrences of not to me
una form To be
To be provided
1111
ma
Jossc
23
M
RECEIVED
51
JUN 26,575
Kwoc
81
91
17
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 91
Donald Burgess
Robert T. Thompson
Richard, Hamilton
Charles Haynes
John Benton
James Kellogg
James McCann
Henry Rouse
Charles Harding
Charles Haynes
Richard Hamilton
Timothy Gorch
Richard Fuggett
Larry Gurley
John Bassett
Marion Cheek
Ed Hagerty
William Sitesis
Joseph O'Rorick
William Bolliard
William D. Campbell
FBI
:
JANNI
SEND TO Paul Daly for
Action TODAY 1/26.
7. B.
Ticke
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL
APARTMENT OF JUSTICE] 2
JUN 25 1975
B10
DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL
62-116395- 322, le
ENCLOSURE
File
62-116395
5.8

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_97.jpeg ---
+
12
*
E
F
17
"
"
$
NW 88326 Docid:32989611 Page 97
5
F
}
TE
}
ALL INFORMATION COT
HEREIN IS UNCLASSESEO
DATE IN 11-200D BY S
3
+
*
116395.
Enclosure

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_96.jpeg ---
Legal Counsel to Mr. Adams, Memo
RE: SENSTUDY 75
had contacted Mr. Cox, Chief Counsel for the United States Postal
Service, at which time he informed Mr. Cox that the White House
had authorized the release of all national security mail covers,
and requested Cox furnish same to him. According to Shaheen,
Cox then contacted the White House to determine if Wallach's
story was in fact true, at which time James Wilderotter, Assistant
Counsel to the President, advised that Wallach's name was unfamiliar
to him, and that he had not been given authority to obtain
national security mail covers. Mr. Shaheen stated he, at the
direction of Mr. O'Connor, was furnishing the Bureau in writing, a
report of his conversations with Wallach and also stated that
O'Connor stated he would no longer have any dealings with Wallach
because of the obvious unethical conduct and lack of honesty on
Wallach's part.
RECOMMENDATION:
D
For information.
pus fast
K
Pam
gra
O
J
Jan
:
- 2 -
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 96

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_95.jpeg ---
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
*GSA FPMR (41 CFR) 101-11.6
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
TO
: Mr. J. B. Adams
FROM
Legal Counsel
SUBJECT:
SENSTUDY 75 (62-116395)
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm
Dep. AD Unv.
Asst. Dir.
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
DATE:
June 20, 1975 Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
aboratory
Your count
Plan. & Exal.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
--
Attached is a FD 302 reporting a conversation
SA Paul V. Daly had with Mr. Paul Wallach, staff member of
United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Activities. The gist of the conversation is that Mr. Wallach
informed SA Daly that he had a list of national security
mail covers which cover the last five years and that he would
use this list for committee business including for interview
purposes if the Bureau did not promptly comply with the Committee's
request for a list of mail covers.
The contents of the attached FD 302, were orally furnished
on 6-18-75 to Deputy Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination,
Michael Shaheen of the Department. Mr. Shaheen and Mr. O'Connor,
Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination, contacted
F. A. O. Schwartz, Chief Counsel to the Senate Select Committee,
to protest Mr. Wallach's actions. Mr. Wallach denied, in a
conversation with Mr. O'Connor, that he had stated he had such
a list to SA Daly. Subsequent to this conversation with
Mr. O'Connor, and on the same day according to Mr. Shaheen,
Wallach called Shaheen and told Shaheen that he wanted to talk
to him off the record, at which point Mr. Wallach stated that
he had access to a list of mail covers through a source of his,
but did not have possession of same. He also stated that he
may have suggested to SA Daly that he had such a list.
Mr. Shaheen stated that it was obvious that Wallach
could not be trusted and remarked that the Department had been
keeping book on him. Shaheen informed SA Daly that Wallach
Enclosure
1
-
Mr. Wannall Enc.
-
1
-
Mr. Cregar
Enc.
1
-
Mr. Mintz Enc.
1
-
Mr. Hotis
1
-
-
-
Enc.
Mr. Daly Enc.
PVD:eek
67 P
REC-102
ALL INFORMATION CONT
HEREIN IS
DATA 10-11-2000 ETS
mor-16
(CONTINUED OVER)
62-116395-320
15 JUL 3 1975
SP
D
ENCLOSURE
LEGAL COUNSEL
NW 88326. Docid:32989611 Page 95
Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan
84
8 1975.

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_93.jpeg ---
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10
MAY 1962 EDITION
GSA GEN. REG. NO. 27
5010-106
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
TO
Mr. W. R. Wannall
FROM
W.
of plegar
SUBJECT: SENSTUDY 75
PURPOSE:
Assoc. Dir.
Dep. AD Adm. _
-
DATE: 6/25/75
ORIGINAL ONLY
Dep. AD Inv.
Asst. Dir.:
Admin.
Comp. Syst.
Ext. Affairs
Files & Com.
Gen. Inv.
Ident.
Inspection
Intell.
Laboratory
Legal Courty
Plan. & Eval.
Spec. Inv.
Training
Telephone Rm.
Director Sec'y
-
-
-
To advise that representatives of Intelligence
Division this date reviewed 693-page CIA document containing
information relating to joint ventures involving CIA and
other members of intelligence community in sensitive matters,
and a specific request has been made for CIA to furnish this
Bureau with copies of all material contained therein believed
to have a bearing on FBI activities.
DETAILS:
By memorandum 6/24/75 you were advised that
arrangements had been effected whereby a CIA representative
would on 6/25/75 bring to FBIHQ a copy of the 693-page document
containing a series of memoranda and reports prepared by CIA
citing instances wherein CIA may have engaged in activities
outside the perimeter of its charter. As you have been advised
members of the Senate Select Committee (SSC) have had prior
access to this document and it contains numerous references
to FBI-CIA joint ventures, some of which are of an extremely
sensitive nature. CIA Director William Colby authorized a
review of this document and agreed to this Bureau obtaining
a copy of material contained therein believed pertinent to
this Bureau's operations.
REC- 102
62-116395-321
On 6/25/75, Mrs. Harriet Mowitt, Executive Secretary
of the Ad Hoc Coordinating Group, appeared at Bureau Headquarters
with the 693-page document divided into three packages.
62-116395
TJM:1hb|hb
3 JUL 7 1975
ROUTE IN ENVELOPL
These
ALL INFORMATZORT OF
SI MINIUMDI
ISOFTC
MOR-16
DATE 10-11-201 BY
☐
5/24/180
(1)
1975
NW 88326 bold: 32989611 Page 93
CONTINUED OVER
-
5°

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_99.jpeg ---
He was advised that the list would contain sensitive information
which would seriously impair ongoing Bureau investigations. He replied that
the names were not classified, and since they were not classified he would
have no problem in using the list. It was explained to Mr. Wallach that
despite the fact it was not classified the list would be extremely sensitive
since it would impair many ongoing investigations and in many instances the
very fact that we are interested in an individual indicates that we are in
possession of sensitive information concerning that individual. Mr. Wallach
pointed out that if this were the case, acknowledging that he had been informed
previously that one of the reasons for the necessity for closely reviewing the
material to be made available was because of this problem, then thé Bureau
should come forward with its own list and point out to him which of the names
are sensitive and which are not. Mr. Wallach stated that only one or two
other people had knowledge of the fact he possessed such a list.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 99
-2-

--- Image 124-10271-10033_multirif_redacted_page_98.jpeg ---
FD-302 (REV. 11-27-70)
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
6-18-75
Date of transcription.
Mr. Paul Wallach, staff member of the United States Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence Activities, telephonically contacted me on
6-18-75 between 2:30 and 3 o'clock P. M., and inquired as to the status of a
request by the Committee concerning mail cover information. He asked if I
could furnish him a time when he might expect our response to be delivered
to him. He pointed out that he had had previous discussions with me and
Mr. Shaheen of the Department concerning this matter, and Mr. Shaheen
had indicated to him that he could expect the response to have been given to
him by this time. Mr. Wallach was informed that a time certain for
delivery of a response concerning this request could not be given, and it
was explained to him that a vast amount of material was being reviewed
pursuant to request of the Senate Select Committee and other committees of
Congress and that because of the amount of work involved in all these requests
it was not possible to make a judgment as to the date of the response.
Mr. Wallach indicated he felt he had been misled by Mr. Shaheen
into believing that he would have a response to his request and that he was
going to recontact Mr. Shaheen. He made a general inquiry as to whether one
Agent might be gathering all the information and as to whether he might be
allowed to come to FBI Headquarters and review what has been gathered to
this point. He was informed that all disclosures have to receive proper
Bureau approval and that it would not be possible for him to review such
information in the absence of such approval. He asked if the Bureau could
separate the response by making available immediately portions of the mail
cover lists such as the identities of people who were the targets of mail
covers in the domestic field. He again was informed that this was not
possible in the absence of proper approval. Mr. Wallach stated that he
wanted me to know that he was in possession of a list of Bureau mail covers
for the past five years which he had been furnished by a source whom he did
not identify. He was asked (1) if this list concerned the mail covers in the
national security areas and, (2) was it a national list. Mr. Wallach stated it
was a national list in the national security areas. He stated he was not sure
of its accuracy. He indicated that he would have no reservations about using
the list to conduct the Senate Select Committee business and stated that inter-
views may be conducted based on the list.
-
Interviewed on.
ALL INFORMATION ORDE
HEREIN IS UNCLA
DATE 10-11-2006 12 Septon/
6-18-75
at.
Washington, D. C.
ND
MDR-76
File #
by
-
Paul V. Daly
Date dictated
6-18-75
This document contains neither recommendations nor conclusions of the FBI. It is the property of the FBI and is loaned to your agency;
it and its contents are not to be distributed outside your agency.
NW 88326 Docld:32989611 Page 98