

--- Image 157-10002-10056_page_1.jpeg ---
157-10002-10056
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Date: 09/30/93
Page:1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10002-10056
RECORDS SERIES :
MEMORANDUM
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : CIA
FROM: SCHLESINGER, ARTHUR JR
TO : THE PRESIDENT
TITLE :
CIA REORGANIZATION
CIA
DATE : 06/10/61
PAGES: 15
SUBJECTS :
COVERT ACTION
PARAMILITARY WARFARE
CUBA
POLICY CONTROL
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : S
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS : P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 09/30/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
Box 244
Folder 7
Exhibit 5 to R. Goodwin testimony on 7/18/75
NW 50955 DocId: 32281896 Page 1
F
[R] - ITEM IS RESTRICTED
THO
2222
4

--- Image 157-10002-10056_page_2.jpeg ---
:
:
10. Sperations and Policy
SECHET
3.
Clandestins activistes should be accessed not only in the context
of their relationship to an open society but ales in the context of their
rolationebip to United States foreign policy.
CIA operations have not been bald effectively sebordlasts to U.S.
foreign policy.
1.
Clandestine intelligence collection is, by charter, from from
This fact exposes American foreign policy
State Department control.
to a multitude of embarrassinents when CIA la diecovered recruiting
The recen
agente or developing sources in @ friendly country.
Singapore cose, whon CIA, without notice to the Consul General,
tried to subrost a member of the Spacial Branch of the Singaporo
After complications of
Police provides as instructive example.
ludicrous conglozity, including an attempt to subject the recruit to
a le-detector test, it terned out that the recruit knd long since
Infermed bie superiore of the CIA approach and wes leading CIA
imo a trep which, when spring, produced considerakle ombartagy-
most to relations between the US and the Gingapore government.
There have been troubles of a comparable ext
(1) (B)
4 NOV 93
- DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Declassify ☐ In part and excise as shown
Retain Class'n ☐ Change/classify to
☐ With concurrence of
2
CT WAS SEECT OF
FPC/HDR by.
zun (where
Fork in a
DM Ganado Nationals v
erniggled
3050-
RFE
CLA bas anid that, in such cases, neither the Emhooey nor the Depart.
ment in Washington is normally informed of this type of operation.
In abort, no ena knows how many potential problems for US foreign
policy and how much potential friction with friendly states
being created at this moment by CIA clandestine intelligence operation
Surely there is on argument for permitting State to decide whether the
advantage to be joined by the operation (a. g., the information derivati
from en ageni wilbin the Special Drench of the Singapore Policz) eui-
weighs the rick (6.5., arseperating the local government and choking
Clendeating
ite confidance both in our purpoese aod in our sensal,
intelligence operations should plainly be clanzed both with the Depart.
ment of State and (cave for encentlocal instances and cu agreement of
the Secretary of State) with the local U.S. Ambassador.
1
1
NW 50955 DocId: 32281896 Page 2
i

--- Image 157-10002-10056_page_3.jpeg ---
SECRET
7.
&
(1)(B)
4 NOV 93
It has meant too that the State Department, often appriced of an
operation only in its later stagon, is under great promoure to
endorse the sporetion 34 already mounted becaues of the alleged
vil consequences of Oxorcislug & rete. I well remember Tom
Mann's remark the day the decision was made to go ahead on Cuba:
"I would nevar have favored initiating this operation; but, since it
kas gone as far as it bee, I do not think we can rich cailing it off."
Moreover, ni a tires when there is increasing premium en activism,
State, when it questions CIA operations or Initiatives, caste toelf in
a prieøy, sisey, cogative rele. The advocate of clandestine activities
seamna 'tough' and realistic; the exponoat has to invoke rech intangibles
sa the reputation of the United States, world public opinion, "What
do we say in the United Nations7", etc., and ossme bopalescly
túsalietis, legalistic and 'scít. '
en
The result of CIA's initiative in covert political operations has boon
to crasto situations which have forced policy on the State Department.
This was not the original idea behind CIA. As Allen Dulles wrote
in hie 1947 memorandum to the Sonata Aruxd Services Committee,
"The Central Entelligence Agency should have nothing to do with policy.'
Yet, in the yecare since, CIA has, in effect, 'arade' pelloy in many
parte of the world. A number of governments still in power know
that they have even been targets of CIA attempts at Gerthrow
a state of mind calculated to stimulate friendly feelings toward the
United States. Indonsela, of course, la a prime oxample,
This experience suggests that the present system by which CIÀ notifies
State of a projected covert operation is inadequate to protect US
Interoute. There
There must be some means by which Skate can be informed
of such operations at an early enough etage to affret the conception
and preliminary planning of the operation. Otherwise CIA will coa
tinue to confront State with propositions having potential impact on
foreign policy but at too late a point to subject that impact to reason-
akle control.
The Controlled American Soures (CAS) repreesnie a particuing
espect of time encroachment on poitey-making fanstloca. CIA toler
bas nearly as many people under official 09758 Grosse02 00 Sta
$900 to 3700. About 1500 cae,are cador Stato Department cover
NW 50955 DocId: 32281896 Page 3
See 3
DEPARTMENT OF 9.
STA
* Retain class'n ☐ Change/classify to
With concurrence of
LOO Peclassify ☐ In part and excise as
excise (as shown
721-6-1-93
JEK ACT EQ_12356, Sec. 13 (et (1)
7
FPC/HDR by

--- Image 157-10002-10056_page_5.jpeg ---
i
NOV 23
i
SECRED
Pelite Secz
JEKACT
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
✓ Retain class'n ☐ Change/classify to
With eoncurrence of
☐ Declassify ☐ In part and excise as shown
EO 12356, Sec. I.
FFC/HDR by
the night of the Generals' reveit/ Algerta posneon-by-noted
with amusement that the top flear was ablese with lights.
with lights. (I am
informed that Ambassador Carly was ohle to escure entrance that
night to the Catoffices only with difficulty.)
GIA is apparently now firmly committed to the CAB approach en a
Formsment solution for Nonachiema I la pressing to bare CLA
paeple given the rank of Counselo Before State lespe contred
more and more of its protumed overesse personnal, and keface CA
boccavas permaneally integrated lose the Foreign Carvice, it would
saem limportant (a) to secure ovary ambassador the firın esntrol
over the local CAS atrilon nominally promised in the NCC Directive
of Dancaxy 19, 1961, and (b) to review the current CAS austion with
sajoye to a steady reduction ef CAS personnel,
4. Faramilitary warfare, I gather, is regarded in some quartore
as a purely technical matter, easily detachable from policy and there-
fore a proper function of the Department of Defense. Yot there la
almost no CIA function mere peculiarly dependant on the political
context then paramiliszy warlors.
There are atvorel rossono for this. For can thing,
For can thing, a paramilitary
speration le ln its nature a large end citributable speretion and thereby,
no suggested abora, clashes with the presuppositions of our open
society. (These considerations nood not apply, hamover, to tha
training of, say, the South Vistonmusce in guarrilla @ctics er to the
export of already existing guerrilla activities.) For anniher, the
alrocky
moral and political price of direct paremilitary falluro is acute for
Communists, when they stimulate paramilitary activity, are
doing what the world expects from them; when va do il va appear
to betray our ewn professed principles and therefore canect afford to
compound delinquency by defeat. Moreover, as the rodent Algeriza
episode chowed, once we convince the world that we are committed to a
paramilitary endecver, wo will be blamed for all sorts of thinga. Asse
C.A.
no the recent tractors-faz-prizomero episode 657d, when we do sand
man to possible death, we cennet lightly write them all and cluze the
na
booka, The Communists, on the other hand, have no soreplao about
liquideting a lasing them
NW 50955 DocId: 32281896
Page 5
!

--- Image 157-10002-10056_page_4.jpeg ---
1
SEGRET
4 NOV 93
B
931
(1) (8)
(1) (c)
4 NOV 93
other
8.
er 2200 are premambly under military or ethos nën-Statoi
over).] Originally the use of State Department cover for
A personal was supposed to be strictly limited and temporary.
Le Balles-Correa-Jackeen report stated in 1948, "The CIA should
get uso date Department cover as a simple answer to all its problamies
But should@roceed to develop its own outside suvor and eventually in
this way and rough increased efficiency of its overdeas personnri,
None
fund o way to temper its demands upon the State Department.
holess CLA hoa zendily increased its requisitions for official cover.
There are overal r Segons why CLA has alagñoned its original intenti:
of developing cysteme private cover. in casier to arrange cove
brough Slate; it is lea
it is leave; it is quicker; it facilitates the
ecurity of operations sa Gell as of corpinunicatious; It insures a
leasanter a
santer 11e for the CIA people. But the affect is to further the
IA encroachment on the traditional functions of State.
soine missione, I understand, CAS personnel cutnumbers regular
State Department personnel. American Exoradcy in Vienna.
ões of 20 peraons listed in the October 1950 Foreign Cervico List no.
being in the Politicni Secticas 16 ore CAS portionnels of the 31 efficere
CASCA
Listed on enghring in soparsing activitioe, ever half are CAS & the:
13 efficara Moted in the Politieel Section in eus Ambager in C
13 are CASOn the day of President Kennedy's Inauguration 6 priscont
Fet the petitie atticars carving in United States Embassies ware CAB
Sometimes the CIAAnission chief has been in the country longer, has
inore money at his disposal, wielde mare influssen (and is abler) tha
the Ambaseador Often be has direct accese to local Prime
Minister. Sometimes (as during a critical period 1 &000) he pursu
a different policy from that of the Ambassador. Aloo he is generally
well known ecully as the CIA representative.
In Par
In the Paris Ambassy today, there are 123 CLA people. CA
123/CLA
has long since begun to mora isto areas of political reporting normally
occupied by State. The CIA mon doing overt internal political reporting
eetplumber those in the Embassy's political section by 10-2] CIA hab
egún sought to monopolize contact with certain French political
ties, among them the President of the National Assembly.
the top floor of the Pazia Linhassy, a fact well known locally; and en
CMccuies
NW 50955 DocId: 32281896
Page 4
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
De Sec 3 ✓ Retain class'n ☐ Change/classify fo
JPicket
☐ With concurrence of
☐ Declassify ☐ In part and excise- as
50 12355, Sa. hastal
FPC/HDR by
-
excise as shown
7
12-16-193