

--- Image 176-10011-10152_page_1.jpeg ---
176-10011-10152
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
5/5/2016
Identification Form
Date:
AGENCY:
RECORD NUMBER:
.
NARA
176-10011-10152
RECORD SERIES: NSF
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
Agency Information
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
WH
FROM:
TO:
THE RECORD
TITLE:
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
06/08/1961
DATE:
PAGES:
4
SUBJECTS:
:
DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
IC
Redact
05/08/1998
UPON AGENCY REVIEW
NSF:M&M:SPECIAL GROUP(CI) MEETINGS:6/61-10/62:BOX 319:PENDING NLK-92-104
v9.1
I
I
I
-
3

--- Image 176-10011-10152_page_2.jpeg ---
SAT SAN.
SECRET - EYES ONLY
742
8. June 1961
6/22/01
Read per
Mr. B.
aveashor
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Minutes of Special Group Meeting, 8 June 1961
PRESENT: Messrs. Dewies, Gilpatric, Bundy, Ralph Dungan, Balles
Mr. Dungan, Special Assistant to the President, participated
in the Special Group meeting for the first time.
1. Congo
Mesars. Bowles ned Gilpatric agreed with the plan for the
Congo. Mr. Bowles conditioned his approval on the acceptance of
the three provisions set forth in the State Department internal
menvrandum dated 6 June 1961 (copy attached). Mr. Dulles indicated
that these conditions were recepted by the Agency bat ho pointed out
that the condition which prescribed the inclusion of Gizenga or his
representative in the Leopoldville Government involved the danger
of bringing in a representative of Moscow who would attempt to
subvert and control the government. Mir. Bundy felt that he could
mat spøráve this program without referance to higher authority.
Nate wão made of the possibility that if Gizengo decided to
participate in a new Leopoldville Government or Parliament, he had
ample resources and a chanen eventually to win centrol of the government.
Raview of Political Actica Projecta
Mr. Bandy stated that because of the special sensitivity of
programs involving covert support to political parties and leaders
in friendly countries, Egher authority wished to review them.
Mr. Bundy proposed Thursday or Friday, June 15th or 16th, for
this purpose.
Mr. Bowlee suggested that we might sck to have a general
policy enunciated regarding this subject. Other members of the Group
-SECRET - EYES ONLY

--- Image 176-10011-10152_page_5.jpeg ---
SECRET - EYES ONLY
retention. Mr. Gilpatric nated the very close relationship between
his office and the Agency and felt that he could obtain all the
information he needed without receiving a copy of the minutes.
Mr. Dulles suggested that because of the sensitivity of these records
and bechune somme of the references contained therein involved the
use of pseudonyms, the peed of the Group might be satisfied by
having copies of the minutes of each meeting made available at the
subsequent meeting for approval. Messrs. Bundy and Dungan agreed
to the submissian of the minutes for approval at a subsequent meeting
but stated that they might have a need for a complete record immediately
at hand to answer any questione put to thems by higher authority.
:
THOMAS P. SCHREYER
SECRET - EYES ONLY

--- Image 176-10011-10152_page_3.jpeg ---
SECRET - EYES ONLY
suggested that a general policy statement might not be sufficiently
flexible to take care of special situations which might arise,
Mr. Dulles neted that the pertinent NSC paper authorized
programa much as that under discussion, but emphasized that he
would only undertake this type of activity if it was fully supported
by the Department of State and higher authority. Ho stated that be
fully appreciated the sensitivity of this type of activity. Mr. Dulles
said, however, that be felt the Special Group should have come
Latiŕzdo to make decisions on these matters within the general policy
which might be laid down by higher authority without referral of
each specific case for approval. .
Mr. Bundy stated that he would like her. Dungan to work with
our people to the preparation of the briefing to be given higher
authority next week.
3. Release Procedures - Francis Gary Powere
Because of the contingency nature of the proposal and because
of the crowded agends, discussion of this matter was deferred to the
next meeting.
4. SIPOLLY Flight, Vietnam
This flight was approved with Chinat personnel. There was some
discession as to the desirability of having South Vietnamese conduct
these missions but it was pointed out that they did not have the
competence.
5. Cavest Annex, VietnaES
This annes was approved. It was noted that a progress report
had fast been received and it was suggested that this repart bë
distributed to members of the Group.
Geyort Annez, Kərca
Eir. Bundy veiterated the decision that covert annexes should
not be processed through the NSC machinery. Because of the interest
of higher authority in political action oporations in friendly areas (see
Item 2) and since this annos was written in rather brand terms, ho
would like to check it further.
2
1
i
SECRET - EYES ONLY

--- Image 176-10011-10152_page_4.jpeg ---
SECRET - EYES ONLY
1. TAGALE
15r. Dulles stated that while he wanted to open Hemangion ci
this matter at this meeting, he did not expect a float decision to be
made until the next meeting. Mr. Bundy noted the previous reserva-
tions of the Imate Department and the fact that this matter had been
considered but not approved three times previously. Mr. Culpatric
supported the need for current Information which TACKLE would
produco and suggested the possible use of U.S. personnel for the
TAGELS mission. Dulles stated his opinten (hat the use of
American persamel would raise serious problems in the event of
an accident. The use of well qualified Chinat craws, in his spintos,
would mitigate the risks involved. It was agreed that the proposal
would be resubmitted inter.
8. Nicaragua
Mr. Dulles cutlined the nature and value of the equipment
remaining at Puerto Cabezas and of the need for negotiating with
Samoza to effect its recovery. He indicated that some quid pro quo
would probably be involved in achieving an agreement with Somoss.
Mr. Bandy stated that this was a mattor that should be negotiated
between the Agency and the Department of este and need not be again
referred to the Special Group.
Cuba
Mr. Dalles stated that he wanted to raise in a general way at
this meeting the problem of the Agency's relations with the exile groups.
the payment to dependente of the strike force and the publications
which the Agency has been supporting. He emphasized that therO
involved a considerable amount of mondy and that the matter should
be resolved at an early date. It was agreed that the Agency should
discuse this metter with Deputy Assistant Secretary Morales-Carston
and submit a formal proposal to so early meeting of the Special Group.
subælt
10. Minates of Special Group Meetings
Mr. Bundy requested that copies of the minutes of Special Group
meetings be forwarded to members of the Group for approval and
SECRET-EVES ONLY