

--- Image 176-10036-10058_page_1.jpeg ---
1
1
1
1
176-10036-10058
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER : 176-10036-10058
RECORD SERIES: National Security Files
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR: CIA
FROM :
TO: Director, CIA
TITLE: Activities of Cuban Trained Peruvian Guerrillas
DATE : 4/11/1963
PAGES : 5
SUBJECTS :
DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 9/10/2000
OPENING CRITERIA :
:
COMMENTS: National Security Files, Box 51: Cuba, Subjects intelligence material
6/63-7/63. Box 1

--- Image 176-10036-10058_page_3.jpeg ---
i
SECRET
10.
persons in numerous points of entry in Latin America and with contacts
in several European capitals who assist the group on their clandestine
return. Although many left Peru openly on valid papers, they are coming
back illegally. Some have false documentation from other countries,
primarily from Colombia; some have Peruvian passports issued in the
names of persons now deceased; come are crossing the borders from
neighboring countries clandestinely without showing any papers and
some go
by small boats to isolated areas.
The agent is a member of the Movimiento Izquierda Revolu–
cionário (MIR) of Peru which now plans to join with other leftist
revolutionary groups to bring about a coup before the elections
scheduled for June 1963. The agent knows of come 200 Peruvians who
have received Cuban training, only a small percentage of whom are
actually Communist Party members.
Approximately 300 persons have been named by the agent as
being connected with the ring helping the Peruvians to reinfiltrate
secretly Attempts are being made to learn whether some of these,
particularly those used as "Co-ordinators" or "Correspondence points"
Europe and the United States, are also connected with the illegal
return of Cubaz
of Cuban-trained guerrillas to other countries
MING
Paris has emerged as the center of the network. Groups of
ten arrive weekly from Cuba to be sent to various Latin American
countries for eventual re-entry into Peru. The man in charge of the
ruvians ie headquartered in Paris. From there, he has been direct
ing the travel sending instructions to his scattered subordinates,
and receiving ports and information, from contacts throughout th
world and handling funds.
Correspondence between members of the group is by cable and
by letter The security of communications is protected by several
alternate systems of code and secret writing. Each of the trainees
has been assigned a number, and letter and number designations are
given to hotels and pensions. In cable correspondence, the ring uses
these numbers to indicate which persone are traveling and where they
may bo reached. The content of the messages appears to relate to
business matters, covering shipment dates and invoice numbers for
example Letter correspondence contains secret writing with
relatively sophiscated systems, interspaced between lines of innocuous
Lendly or business letters. A dictionary is used for coded mes-
iges in either cables or letters, with page and word mumber refer
ing to oldestine key words
-
_
SECRET

--- Image 176-10036-10058_page_4.jpeg ---
:
SECRET
10. The ring takes great precautions to prevent tracing of the
àddressees. One of the important links is a woman whose Paris home
has entrances on two different streets. She and her mishänd use the
principal street address for their normal lives, but the back street
address for the receipt of clandestine correspondence.
11. In this Cuban-sponsored subversive operation, routes of
travel are planned to escape easy detection of the fact that a pers
has left his home, been trained, and, has returned to his country
Host of the travel has been by way of Mexico and thence to Cuba,
since it was possible to escape detection of the travel. The Cubans.
Issued loose leaf inserts for the travelers' passports, rather than
stamping a record of the travel in the document itself The Mexican
Goverment has recently begun measures to control this travel, but a
largo mmbër have managed to enter and leave Cuba for Mexico without
detection. Some of the travel to Cubs is by way of the Dutch and British
West Indies
12. Many of the returning trainees go through Paris and Prage
From Faris the travelers fan out to a number of different, batin
American countries from which they attempt olandestine re-en
re-entry into
Peruć Ecuador "Colombin and Brazil have been used extensively aa
Latin merican entry points as the travelers leavé Paris
13. The egont reports that money for this extensive travel
program has been deposited in Sviss banks by the Chinese Communists
viá Cuba, “MIR trainees were told not to ask for aid from the Sovietė
to avoid straining relations with China, "since it is backing them”
Our asset) taɛ responsible for the safekeeping of approximately $15,000
when he arrived in Pa
in Paris.) The money had been parceled out among a
number of trainees during the trip, and they handed it to the Paris
Geordinator there.
here. Our asset vas give $1,000 when he left Parlo
which he was to
to use for documentation when he was ready
Peru He reported that the cost of the travel of his
Peru to Cuba was approximately $25,000, and that this money
ought
local leader from Paris by courier before the tr
MIB
inter
1. The MFR plans to establish a cover importing company
senting a French firm which exports cheap agricultural equipment.
The branch in Peru will serve as a cover for activities involving
the travel of HR members and the transfer of funds. It will also
be a clearing house for information and instructions. When the
current group of trainees is back in Peru, another group will be
sent out and funded through the cover fin The agent reports that
SECRET

--- Image 176-10036-10058_page_2.jpeg ---
:
:
Şanifized
WLK-01-051-7-4-5 (
SECRET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.
EYES ONLY
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
+
11 April 1963
Activities of Cuban-Trained Peruvian Guerrillas
1. The information in this memorandum comes from an extremely
sensitive source who is currently a member of a group of Cuban-trained
Peruvian guerrillas. No other dissemination has been made of the re
ports he has provided, in order to protect him and to insure that a
channel is kept open to him. The information is being forwarded in
this restricted manner at this time to furnish an insight into the
extent of Cuban efforts to assist Latin American revolutionary move-
ments. The Agency directed asset is working inside a network which is
now assisting Cuban-trained Latin Americans to re-enter their ow
countries illegally, and to join with leftist revolutionary groups
overthrow the established governments
The Agency esset vas a member of a group of more than 70
eruvians trained in Cuba from June until December 1962 His contingent
raveled in small groups by way of Mexico. He received his first
spécial assigamu
ment when he was appointed to stay behind in Mexicó
temporarily, and
ily and to act as a clandestine, contact with a Cuban Embassy
official there
there The Cuban gave him instructions and funds, and hồ
directed the later groups which transited Hexico
5
The Peruvian oup was ostensibly in Cuba only to attend the
July celebrations According to our agent, some of the members them
selves did not mov: in advance they were to be given training. The
Oubans set the Peruvians up as self-contained mito in secret train
ing sites in Habana, where they were given political indoctrination
and weapons Later they were moved to rural hill areas for guerrill
training The agent has described in detail these secret, training
sites giving address of the houses and the locations of the gue
la area8
WEA
1. The agent van removed from his group for several weeks to
undergo special training in secret communications techniques ba
preparation for his current assi mment
At present, the agent acts as coordinator, helping the
Peruvians to return illegally to Paru. He is in correspondence with
..
SECRET
(4)

--- Image 176-10036-10058_page_5.jpeg ---
:
SECRET
the next group will mumber approximately 100 men and that they will
receive instructions in Algeria, North Vietnam, Laos, and China. The
top leader of the Peruvian group has told his lieutenants that ho will
soon go to Algeria to start arrangements for this training.
15. The MIR has planned four fronts in Peru in its proposed
revolution. One is in the south with headquarters in Cusco, another
is in the central region in the Sierra, a third is in Lima, and the
fourth is in northern Peru. The agent has named the leaders in charge
of each of the four fronts.
16. Our asset makes frequent reference to internal disputes in
the HIR between the old line Communists and those referred to as
Trotskyites. The MIR leaders in Cuba felt that some of their oum
groups had joined with the Trotskyites and they discussed this problem
with Fidel Castro. Castro promised not to let the so-called Trotáky-
ites return to Paru until the others were already in place and in
command of the several fronts. Some of the avowed Trotskyites were
acong the first to be sent back, horever, and the HR leaders are
highly incensed. The leaders fear that the Trotskyites will endanger
the movement and they have been especially disturbed to find that
two Cuban officers, who are known to be Trotskyites, bad accompani
them from Cuba.
17 The Agency asset had first estimated that it would také.
least two montha for all of the Peruvians to return. The re-entry
program had fallen approximately a month behind schedule because of
unexpected problems of transferring funds and btaining document
Moreover,. a. Communist, group in one of the neighboring countri which.
was to help then began to charge exorbitant amounts for its assistend
The Peruvians were obliged to wait until additional money was brought
them by courie
18. The agent also estimated that at least another mon
month or
to would be required to complete plans for the revoluti After all
af
the
he trainees were back. The leaders of the trainees complained
Eat the MR had not made adequate plans to receive the groups and
had not developed its, revolutionary plans soundly
(-I-
Recently, however, the operation has been increasing in
tempo. The leaders of the HUR have been putting additional pressures
on our asset and on others in the chain to speed up re
T
number of the trainees have spread out to mall neighboring towns,
ready to cross the border into Peru clandestinely. False comenta-
ion of these nearby countries is also being procured to assist others
to cross into Peru leg
eru "legally"
SECRET