

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_1.jpeg ---
198-10005-10017
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Date:
6/24/201
Identification Form
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10005-10017
RECORD SERIES:
CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
FROM:
CIA
TO:
TITLE:
CUBA PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT
04/10/1962
DATE:
PAGES:
6
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS
MRR GROUP
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
1B; 4
Redact
10/07/1997
Califano Papers, Box 3, Folder 2. Draft copy of Cuba Project Progress Report, 4-11 April 1962,
regarding clandestine resistance groups in Cuba.
1
v9.1
NW 50955
Department of the Army EO 13526
☑ ✓ Declassify ☐ Exclude □ Exempt
Authority.
☐ Refer To
Review Date 12 AUGIS BY W
11
DocId:32423735 Page 1

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_2.jpeg ---
DRAFT
SECRET
10 APR 1962
CUBA PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT
411 April 1962
OPERATIONAL
1. An internal leader of the Movimiento Recuperacion Revolu
cionario (MRR) who was infiltrated into Cuba on 29 December 1961, and
exfiltrated on 29 March 1962, said at a debriefing on 7 April that he
considers only five clandestine resistance
organizations in
Cuba of national importance: The Directorio Revolucionario Estudantil
(DRE), Movimiento Democrat Cristiano (MDC), Movimiento Revolu
cionario del Pueblo (MRP), Movimiento Recuperacion Revolucionario
(MRK), and the 30th of November
unit.
necessary motivation and discipline to
Only these groups have the
coordination among them-
nelves There are a large number of other underground revolutionary
units
which claim to be of national importance but which have no more
than two or three dozen men at most and can be found only in the area
where they were established. Most of the small
14/28tions
Appear to have
been established by self-named leaders for personal reasons, financial
gain through the sale of 'bonds, or for future political opportunity
whe
Fidel Castro is overthrown
Although the
small groups are relatively inactive, their claims to importance have
attracted numerous dissidents who could be more useful if they were
members of the few larger and more effective organizations
SECRET
Because

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_5.jpeg ---
SECRET
4
Opa-locka, Florida. This information is secured entirely from un
trained observers and is presented partly as original unconfirmed data
and partly as a supplement to intelligence already received from controlled
reliable source i
All CAC information is screened for use in the daily
and weekly Cuban summaries. During the past week
Iwere pre
1309
Cuban refugees through Miami, peepared 263 preliminary interrogation
reports and disseminated 135 information reports were
8. Numerous reports confirm that all towns have been partitioned
into "blocks" infiltrated by communist informants under the direction of
(alsoj
block chiefs of the Comite de Defensa. The informant system
utilizes
data procured from the telephone monitoring switchboards
established in the telephone centrals of every town. One refugee from
the Cuban Telephone Company described a switchboard panel in the
Principe plant" in Havana which was monitoring 20 or 30 positions."
These informants, their chiefs, members of the militia, G-2, "chivatos"
(provocation agents), and other Castro supporters are now generally
labeled by the populace as communists rather than Castroists.
9. While the network of informants protects the home front,
officials of the National Directorate of the Integrated Revolutionary
Organization (ORI) are increasingly occupied with the export of Castroist-
communism to the Western Hemisphere. Flight manifests of Cubana
Airlines show that 'hundreds of Latin Americans are being brought to
SECRET
::4:
1

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_4.jpeg ---
N
SECRET
for dissemination. The most interesting and informative refugee thus
far is the brother of Amando Hart, the Cuban Minister of Education and
member of the twenty-five man ORI Central Committee
The center i
also collecting travel and personal documents which may be used for
agent operations.
We received valuable data on Cuban trade from the debriefing,
of a former official of the Ministry of Commerce who defected in Canada
were informed
ins
at
the end of March. We
February by CIA sources
that this official was disaffected and wished to work against Castro.
W
contacted him and attempted unsuccessfully to induce him to return to
Cuba as our agent. We have since expedited his travel to Miami where
he is being interrogated.
e
7. We are in contact with Eva Matos, the sister of Huber Matos
former associate of Fidel Castro, who broke with Fidel and has been
in jail on the Isle of Pines since 1960. Although there is no practical
method of effecting the escape or release of Huber at present, we will
continue contact with his sister, who maintains correspondence with
Huber through his father and his wife who are in Cuba,
CAC INFORMATION REPORTS
Following are highlights from selected interrogations of Cuban
refugees processed through the Caribbean Admission Center (CAC) at
SECRET
perBill H

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_6.jpeg ---
}
SECRET
Cuba for training and indoctrination.
In addition to regular commercial
transportation, charter flights to service these persons are being run
thrice monthly throughout South America. In order to avoid Cuban visas
and entry-exit stamps in their passports, these persons are given visas
on separate sheet of paper. In Cuba all arrangements are made for
them by the Instituto Cubano de Amistad con los Pueblos (ICAP).
10. Soviet military equipment has been reported in increasingly
larger quantities and wider disbursement. One refugee said that he
saw 20 or 25 wheel-mounted Soviet 100 mm field guns M-55 (identified
from photographs) at a militia camp at Miranda near Camaguey.
11 Shortages of certain essential food items have resulted in
widespread protests and, in a few instances to open action by those
directly affected. A group of '13 to 15 women reportedly waylaid a
milk truck, overpowered the driver, and each carried off two liters
of milk.
One,
12 Refugees described the existence of three resistance organi
tions, allegedly widespread in membership but limited in action.
the Movimiento de Recuperacion Revolucionario Militar (MRRM) is a
group which has broken away from the Movimiento de Recuperacion
Revolucionario (MRR) Reportedly, its objective is to apprehend key
Castro leaders when the time is appropriate. MRRM is organized in
all provinces except Matanzas and Camaguey where the movement has
SECRET

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_3.jpeg ---
SECRET
2
of the boundless personal ambitions of the respective leaders and the
however
geographic dispersion of the units, these small groups could never be
Corganization
effectively merged into a centrally directed larger To use them
effectively we would have to try to siphon off the membership te
useful
controlled groups. If this is not possible, they may serve
purpose by providing unwitting diversionary harrassment while the
larger groups work toward the major goals.
2. A unilaterally recruited senior officer of the diplomatic
service of a neutralist African country has been briefed and given
training in secret writing and communications to assist him in reporting
on our objectives in Cuba. He is now in Havana from where he plans
SCHE
to travel to dread of interest to us
The Chief of the Danish Intelligence Service has agreed to
cooperate with us on Cuban intelligence operations He has identified
several sources aboard ships transitting Cuban ports and has arranged
for their periodic briefing and debriefing
The Norwegian Intelligence Service has also agreed to cooperate
us in establish case officer "centers" in Norway and Kiel, Germany,
handle Norwegian Merchant Marine sources who call at Cuban ports.
5. The Madrid Station Cuban refugee debriefing center is now
in operation and results of the first interrogations are
being reviewed
SECRET

--- Image 198-10005-10017_page_7.jpeg ---
1
SECRET
now begun to develop a following. The second organisation, the Movi-
miento Democratico Cristiano (MDC), is described as oriented along
traditional Christian democratic lines. It is said to have a "national
coordinator,
national executive, provincial, military and political
coordinators, and resistance chiefs. They claim that military and
counter-revolutionary activities have been limited because of lack of
equipment. A third organization, the Unidad Revolucionario (UR),
is reported to be carrying out the sabotage of sugar fields by burning
using a small incendiary device made of gelatin, match heads, potassium
permanganate tablets, and glycerine.
SECRET