

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_1.jpeg ---
198-10007-10021
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Date:
6/24/201
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10007-10021
RECORD SERIES:
CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
ORIGINATOR:
ICCCA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
Identification Form
Agency Information
Document Information
CHMN, SUBCMMT ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
MEMBER OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE
REPORT FOR JULY-AUGUST ON ACTIONS TAKEN TO COMBAT CASTRO-COMMUNIST
SUBVERSION
DATE:
PAGES:
09/30/1963
23
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA: .
COMMENTS:
ENHANCEMENT OF INTELLIGENCE ON CUBAN
SUBVERSION
STRENGTHENING OF COUNTER-INSURGENCY
CAPABILITIES
CONTROL OF TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA
CONTROL OF TRANSFER OF FUNDS
SURVEILLANCE OF CUBAN DIPLOMATIC, COMMERCIAL
AND CULTURAL MISSIONS
CONTROL OF CLANDESTINE MOVEMENT OF GUERILLAS
AND ARMS
CONTROL OF MOVEMENT OF CUBAN PROPAGANDA
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
1B; 4
Redact
04/08/1998
Califano Papers, Box 2, Folder 26. Memo from Chairman, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion to the
members of the Committee re: Report for July-August on Actions Taken to Combat Castro-Communist
Subversion.
JFK Revied
Department of the Army EO 13528
Declassify □ Exclude ☐ Exempt
Authority.
Refer To
Review Date 8/12/2015 By KES
v9.1
30
NW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 1

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_15.jpeg ---
SECRET
-13°
brought to the attention of the OAS, and urged that this action
be taken as soon as possible.
Urged the Government of Guatemala to submit evidence
of communist activity to the OAS.
7. Surveillance of Cuben Dintomatic, Commerical and Cultural
Missions.
Central Intelligency Agency.
(To be filled in by Mr.Wheeler)
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 15
i
22

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_10.jpeg ---
**
SECRET
was suspected of carrying subversives and arms from Cuba to
British Guiana in mid-July. MITCHURINSK was under U.S.
surveillance from its departure from Havana until United
Kingdom forces assumed the task of keeping this ship under
surveillance upon its approach to Georgetown, British Guiana.
Subsequently, British police search of MITCHURINSK in British
Guiame waters revealed nothing of a suspicious nature.
Central Intelligence Agency
At the repeated urging of the CIA Station in Lima
the Peruvian Government late in August published a new anti-
terrorists law providing a penalty of no less than five years
imprisonment for persons who particiate in guerrilla activities
or in the illegal manufacture of weapons or explosives.
The Peruvian National Intelligence Service is working
on a lead furnished by the CIA Station in Lima concerning a
200 ton vessel reportedly involved in arms traffic.
Denerfrent of State
Instructed our Consulate General in Georgetown to
investigate reports that commercial cargoes (which could conceal
illicit arms traffic out of Cuba) had developed between British
Quiana and Cuba. Investigations to date have been negative.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424014 Page 10

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_11.jpeg ---
NW 50955
SECRET
$ -"
Control of Transfer of Funds
Department of State
Cooperated with the Foreign Assets Control Office of
the Treasury Department in developing blocking controls with
respect to Cuba which went into effect on July 9, 1963.
5. Strengthening of Counter-Insurgency Capabilities
Department of Defence
Continued the installation of military communica-
tions facilities in Latin Amarica. Operational dates for the
multi-channel radio stations to be installed in Managua,
Nicaragua and Tegucigalpa, Honduras have been delayed to 15
October 1963 and 15 December 1963, respectively because of new
engineering and contractual requirements. Negotiations are
continuing with Colombia and Ecuador for installation of U.S.
military radio facilities. Completion of a new commercial traie,
Isthmian cable in the Panama Canal Zone within the coming month
is expected to improve military communications within the
United States and the Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern Command.
b. Continued the surveillance of Cuba by U.S. Forces,
reporting as before to U.S. commanders, organisations and agencies.
_
DocId:32424014 Page 11
SECRET

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_13.jpeg ---
"
SECRET
-11-
Permanent assignment of U.S. Coast Guard personnel to SCIATT
in the Canal Zone has been approved and the U.S. Coast Guard
has taken appropriate implementing actions.
Buring the period of this report, the SCIAIT con-
ducted an on-the-job training course at Puntarenas, Costa
Rica. Training was given to 13 members of the Guardia Civil
of Costa Rica who were either newly assigned to the 40 foot
Coast Guard utility boats (CGUBs) or were to be assigned as
replacement crew members.
E. A quarterly inspection and evaluation of the CGUBS
provided other Central American countries was conducted during
the period 17 to 31 August by a mobile training team (MTT)
made up of SCIATT persomnel.
Continued efforts to improve the internal security
of Latin American armies through the provision of Intelligence
Advisors. Presently there are such advisors assigned to 14
Latin countries, emphasizing counterintelligence and counter-
subversion.
h. During the reporting period MTIs conducted training
in counterinsurgency for the armed forces of Colombia, Bolivie,
Venezuela, Peru and El Salvador.
C
NW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 13
SECRET
22

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_12.jpeg ---
T
741
1585
SECRET
-10-
Reports of surveillance have been disseminated to all who have
a requirement to know.
Established a 24 hour per day, 7 days per week duty
watch at the U.S. Military Groups in the Caribbean countries in
conjunction with implementation of the military alerting system.
Continued efforts to staff the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence
Center with properly cleared, trained personnel (this center is
the military focal point for relaying information concerning
the movement of subversives). Filled, partially, the authorized
billets in the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence Center and
took under consideration the problem of an increase in the billet
structure in the Center. The Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern
Command together with his intelligence officer visited Honduras
and Nicaragua and determined that no significant problems existed
which would interfere with effective operations in those
countries.
4. Action previously initiated by the Commander, U.S.
Naval Forces, Southern Command (COMUSNAVSO) to establish a Small
Craft Inspection and Training Team (SCIATT) as a contribution to
the Caribbean Surveillance System is progressing satisfactorily.
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 12
SECRET
+7

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_14.jpeg ---
3
-64
.**
SECRET
-12-
Civic Action MITs were gent to Guatemala, Bolivia,
Colombia, El Salvador, Jamaica and Ecuador.
6. Exchange of Intelligence on Cuban Subversion
Central Intelligence Agency
CIA Stations throughout Latin America continued in a
great majority of countries to furnish to the local internal
security organizations with whom they are in liaison informa-
tion concerning travelers to and from Cuba, as well as such
Information as came to CIA's attention concerning the movement
of funds, ezme and propaganda material. In many instances, the
furnishing of information to the internal security service by
the CIA Station was parallelad by the furnishing of similar
information to the foreign office by the Ambassador or his
representative
The response
Le information has varied
greatly. The Central American countries, in general, began to
pay attention to the information and take action on it. At the
during the reporting period
other extreme, the Brasilian Government/showed little inclination
to follow up on the informs
Department of State
Reiterated to the Foreign Minister of Peru our
interest in having the facts of the Puerto Maldonado incident
NW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 14
SECRET
>>

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_17.jpeg ---
0
SCOUST
+15-
Reassured President Schick of Nicaragua in the
most emphatic terms that the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty did not
mean that our attitude toward Castro has altered in the
slightest, and stressed our interest in seeing steady progress
by all the Isthmian countries in implementing the recommenda-
tions of the Managua Security Conference to block Cuban
subversive efforts.
d. Explained in detail the nature of the Cuban threat
and the related policy objectives of the U.S., during converss-
tion in London and in Washington with Mr. Adam Watson, newly
appointed British Ambassador to Cube.
United States Information Agency
The Agency's press service during the reporting
period transmitted 12 articles, commentaries, and backgrounders
on its wireless file service to USIA posts throughout Latin
America for placement in the local newspapers and the Voice of
America Spanish broadcasts to Latin America carried a total of
28 commentaries and features on the subject of Cuban-based
subversion in addition to the regular reporting of developments
in the hourly newscasts.
SECRET
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 17

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_16.jpeg ---
=
i..
Department of State
SECRET
-14-
Instructed Embassy La Paz to follow up closely on
charges of involvement of Cuban mission in internal politics
of Bolivia, and, at the Embassy's discretion, to point out to
Bolivian officials the opportunity for a possible break in
relations with Cuba. Embassy La Paz was not able to press
for a break when the evidence of Cuban intervention did not
prove to be as conclusive as originally reported.)
3. Other Special Actions
Department of State
Obtained action by the COAS on July 3 on the Lavalle
Committee Report transmitting the document to the governments
and urging them to implement the specific end general recom-
mendations contained therein as soon as possible.
b. Through Embassy Managua informed the Nicaraguan
Government of the matters which we wanted to have considered
during the informal meeting of the Ministers of Security and
Interior of the Isthmian countries held in Managua, August
26-28 in preparation for the second formal meeting of the
Managua Security Conference countries later this year.
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 16
SECRET
47

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_19.jpeg ---
SECRET
-17-
three pamphlets during the period based on Castro's report of
his visit to the Soviet Union (showing that he contradicted
himself in some of his extravagant claims of Soviet progress),
the losses suffered by Cuban labor under Castro, and the fate
of political prisoners in Cuba. When completed, these pamphlets
will be reproduced and distributed in quantity throughout the
NW 50955
DocId:32424014 Page 19
SECRET

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_2.jpeg ---
SECRET
#6
File
September 30, 1963
TO:
FROM:
Members of Subcommittee on Castro-Communist
Subversion.
Chairman, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion
SUBJECT: Report for July - August on Actions Taken to
Combat Castro-Communist Subversion.
Attached is a draft of the Subcommittee's report for
July and August on actions taken to counteract Castro-
communist subversion in the hemisphere. The draft has been
prepared on the basis of the material which you furnished
with certain modification. The CIA member will note that I
have extracted from his submission the items of action taken
and placed these in the body of the report. The intelligence
information contained in the submission I have made into an
annex. I think it is very useful to have the intelligence
data form part of the report, and request that in the future
the CIA member prepare his submission in two parts.
May I have your comments on the draft by close of
business October 1, 1963.
Copies to: CIA Mr. Wheeler (2)
#6, #7
DOD - Col. Haig (2) -#6,
USIA - Mr. Wagley (1)
RAR Mr. Hart (1)
Justice - Mr. Geogheghan (1)
ARA: WGBowdler:jg
9/30/63
20
2Oct 63
M/R called
a
Bot Fullstead advised de- stopped of
V-3 - Aur Staff & amy
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatio
downgrading and
declassification
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 2
n
SECRET
327

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_18.jpeg ---
SECRET
-16-
In response to standing Agency instructions to give
special attention to developments related to Cuba-based
subversion, USIS posts in Latin America were prompt in reporting
incidents and in providing editorial comments from the Latin
American press, all of which was used in the Agency's radio and
press output.
The main developments treated in the Agency's radio and
press coverage included Castro's July 26 speech urging revolu
tions in Latin America, the discovery of terrorist weapons
factories in Guayaquil, the Ecuadoréen Vice President's accuslion
of Guben responsibility for terroriem, the statement by State
Department Press Officer Richard Phillips that "potential
subversive agents" from Cuba to the Caribbean area were passing
through Gren Cayman, the expulsion of a Bolivian youth leader
for receiving funds from Cuba, Castro-trained terrorists in
end
Honduras,/Bolivian protests against meddling by the Cuban Embassy
in the miner's strike. A Voice of America roving reporter in
Latin America provided several reports afamantes on the
subversion picture in countries he visited.
In support of the Agency's effort on Cuban-based
subversion, the publications center in Mexico began work on
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424014 Page 18

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_20.jpeg ---
*
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatid!
downgrading and
declassification.
SECRET
ANNES A
1.
CIA Intelligence Annex
Travel to and from Cuba
Brazil
*
Chartered Cubana Airlines flights between Cuba and
Brazil have become a major means of transporting non-Cuban
Latin Americans to and from Cuba. The five such flights since
Late July have carried nearly 400 non-Cubans.
The first of the recent series
25 July
brought
71 Latin American passengers to Navana for the 26 July celebra-
tions. The other four flights -- on 15, 22, 28 and 29 August
transported er 200 Latin Americans to Brazil from Havana.
Some of the aircraft involved returned to Cuba with smaller
numbers of passengers. Many of the 200 Latin American passengers
had been delegates to the 26 July ceremonies, but others had
apparently been in Cuba for longer periods and some had probably
received training there. Of the passengers on these four flights
to Brazil, 75 were natives of Caribbean area countries. Their
circuitous travel through Brazil was evidently designed to help
conceal the fact that they had been in Cube.
Costa Rica
Two Costa Ricans were among the passengers on a
chartered Cubana plane which was turned back to Havana at Grand
Cayman on 11 July 1963. One vas luz Marina Hernandez Salazaz
the only Costa Rican woman known to have been sent to Cube for
training as a guerrilla warfere instructor. She had been in
Cuba since September 1962. The other Costa Rican passenger was
Carlos Guillen, former head of the Costa Rican Society of
Friends of the Cuban Revolution, who had been in Cuba since
November 1962.
Ecuador
The CIA Station in Quito reports that the military
junta, which assumed power in Ecuador on 11 July, can be expected
NW 50955 DocId: 32424014 Page 20
u
SECRET
*

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_21.jpeg ---
2
SECRET
to follow the guidance of the Embassy and the Station in
controlling travel to and from Cuba and the Soviet bloc. The
activities of Cuban subversives in Ecuador, at least for the
present, have been greatly inhibited by the mass arrests of
Communists and pro-Cubans and by the outlawing of the Communist
Party by the junta.
Honduras
It is reported that the Honduran Communist Party has
issued orders to its members not to attempt to travel to Cuba
at the present time. This action is apparently the result of
the increasing vigilance of the Honduran government and the
greater implementation of stricter travel controls.
2. Movement of Cuban Pzora ganda
Gustere l
According to an unconfirmed report received in July,
a Bureau of Information of the Communist Party of Guatemala is
being formed in collaboration with Prensa Latina and is to be
managed clandestinely. It expects to receive news by shortwave
radio fran Cuba and print bulletins for distribution by radio
stations. This may indicate a pattern by which Prensa Latina
will attempt to dietzibute on a more clandestine basis in other
areas in Latin Ameri
Honduras
It was reliably reported that in mid-July 1963, a
small coastal freighter landed 14 large boxes of Communist
propaganda on the northern coast of Honduras, the boxes having
been transferred at sea from a larger vessel.
3. Movement of Guerrillas and Asus
Argentina
Extremist members of the Peronist Party, apparently
under the leadership of such figures as Nector Villalon and
John William Cooke, are apparently receiving encouragement and
promises of large sums of money from Cuba in support of their
efforts to train and organize subversive groups in Argentina.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424014 Page 21
i

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_3.jpeg ---
1.
"
DRAFT
SECRET
Control of Travel to and from Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
a
6 of 9 copies
GROUP T
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
Developed highly useful information on frequency
of Cuban "chartered" flights to Brazil, names and nationalities
of passengers and crew, and lex measures of control followed
by Brazilian authorities.
Transmitted this information to
sation chiefs in the Latin American countries of the non-
Brazilians travelling on these flights.
Maintained close watch over travel to and from
Cuba. See Annex B for table of known travel of Latin Americans
during July and August.
As a result of information furnished by him by the
CIA Station in Buenos Aires and with the Station's urging, the
Argentine Minister of Interior indicated that he would make
every effort to prevent Argentine delegates from attending the
International Union of Architects Congress in Havana.
At the urging of the CIA Station and the Embassy
the Bolivian Minister of Interior issued in mid-July an order
prohibiting the granting of travel permits to Cuba on other
bloc countries to Bolivian nationale.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424014 Page 3
n
SECRET
r

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_24.jpeg ---
j
SECRET
is
Information on the guerrilla force is scanty and
conflicting. It is apparently composed of members of the National
Liberation Front (FLN), a Commist-dominated and Cuben-supported
revolutionary organization active primarily in Honduras and
Nicaragua since the fall of 1962. The strength of the force
is not knorm.
Nicaragua
A captured guerrilla of the FLN (National Liberation
Front - a Communist-dominated, Cuban-supported, anti-Nicaraguan
group) confessed that he was a member of a group of 46 who
entered Nicaragua from Honduras on 22 July. He said that their
mission was to establish a base camp in the Isabella mountains,
Department of Jinotega, in order to indoctrainate the peasants.
and to train them in guerrilla tactics. He admitted that be
had received six months' guerrilla warfare training in Cuba and
that other FLN leaders had received stallar training. He also
said that the FLN training camp in Honduras vas near E1 Lagarto,
El
on the Patuce River.
4.
Transfer of Funds
British Culana
In British Guiana, Guiana Import-Export Corporation
(Gimpex) received a one million dollar advance payment deposited
by the Cuban Alimpex Corporation for goods to be delivered to
Cuba in the future. Gimpoz has, in turn, loaned this money to
the Government of British Guiana. Cheddi Jagan's People's
Progressive Party is the major stockholder in Gimpex. Mohammed
Kassim, Manager of Gimpex, has indicated that Cimpex will be
able to secure addicional loans from Cuba in amounts sufficient
to tide the Jagan government over any foreseeable crisis. It
was also reported that Gimpex plans to buy aircraft, spare parts
and other machinery in the United States for reshipment to Cuba.
General
Reports continue to be received from many places indicating
that the suitcase full of currency is still one of the moat
common methods used by the Cubane for transmitting funds for
use in supporting subversive activities throughout the hemisphere.
Instances where such funds have been confiscated by the police
have occurred recently in El Salvador, Panama and Ecuador.
*>
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 24

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_4.jpeg ---
*
SECRE
Partly as a result of the efforts of the CIA
station in Santiago, the Government of Chile prohibited the
entry into Chile of organizers of the Cuban sponsored Second
Latin American Youth Congress, which had been scheduled to take
place in Santiago in August. This was one of the factors which
led to postponement of the Congress.
f. After considerable prodding by the CIA Station
and the Embassy the Minister of Public Security of Costa Rica
presented legislative proposals to the Costa Rican Assembly
which will require all persons intending to travel to Communist
countries to have their travel approved by a newly crested
Costa Rican security agency.
CIA Station in Mexico City developed information
concerning the clandestine arrival of passengers in Vera Crus
on Cuban merchant ships. Rfforts are being made to obtain more
information and to encourage stricter controla by the Mexican
authorities.
Department of State
Instructed Embassy Conakry to try to persuade
Guinean authorities to deny use of airport facilities by flights
on Habena-Moscou route. These efforts achieved a temporary
withholding of permission for future regular flights, at lesst
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 4

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_22.jpeg ---
SECRET
Villalon has stated that his plan calls for expanding and
accellerating subversive activities in Argentine culminating
in a complete take over within two years. There is no indica-
tion that Peron himself has agreed to this plan. It has been
reported that leaders of the Communist Party of Argentina have
been greatly annoyed by the tendency of the Castro regime to
support the revolutionary Peronists without having consulted
the Communist Party of Argentina.
It is reported that the so-called Army of National
Liberation (ANL) of Argentina, which is a relatively small
Castroist organization directed from Cuba by John William Cooke,
has in recent weeks been negotiating for the purchase of arms
and has been offered submachine guns, bazookas and other weapons
by two or three private suppliers. It was reported, however,
that the ANL was having difficulty getting enough dollars from
Cuba to make significant purchases possible.
Bolivia
The Bolivian Ministry of Foreign Relations on 23
August protested formally to the Cuban Chargé d'Affaires in
La Paz against the Cuban Embassy support to the miners during
the recent crisis. Subsequently, however, Foreign Minister
Fellman informed the Cuban Charge that he need not fear that
the Government of Bolivia would break diplomatic relations with
Cuba. There has, la fact, been no hard information linking the
Cuban Embassy with the present mining crisis in spite of some
unconfirmed reports of Cuban support.
Brazil
Cuban Ambassador to Brazil, Raul Roa Kouri, is reported
to have attempted to encourage peasant league leader Francisco
Julieo to revitalize the leagues in northern Brazil. According
to some reports efforts are being made to unify the leadership
and bring dissident elements under the general direction of
Juliao. Other reports indicate that, although the Cuban Embassy
is providing guidance and possibly financial support to the
movement, it had not yet resolved the internal dissension in
the leagues.
Colorbia
NW 50955 DocId: 32424014 Page 22
SECRET
L
!

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_23.jpeg ---
SECRET
Colombia
From Colombia reports have been received of increasing
Cuban assistance, primarily in the form of training courses by
instructors who have been trained in Cuba, to the Worker-Student-
Peasant Movement (MOEC). A small guerrilla band encountered
by the Colombian army in July 1963 was broken up when five
members of the band were killed end two others captured. A
small quantity of arms and a considerable amount of books and
pamphlets on revolutionary warfare, photographs of Fidel Castro,
Camilo Cienfuegos and Mao Tse-tung, and bulletins of the MORC
were found at the camp site. Recent reports have indicated an
increase in the terrorist efforts of the MOKC and increased
promises of assistance from Che Guevara with regard to the
training of additional MOEC members.
Costa Rica
In mid-July an increased number of guerrillas were
reportedly being trained in Costa Rica by Adolfo Garcia Barberena,
well-known Nicaraguan revolutionary leader and member of the
FLN (National Liberation Front -- a Communist-dominated, Cuban-
supported, anti-Nicaragua revolutionary group). In early
August, Alberto Serrato, leader of the FLN in Costa Rica, left
with a group of Nicaraguans for the Costa Rican-Nicaraguan
border. The purchase of arms and supplies and the recruitment
of Nicaraguans for a movement against Nicaragua are also reportedly
underway in Costa Rica.
Hectoz Bogantes Zamora, Costa Rican agitator, left San Jose
in mid-August for the Nicaraguan border to supervise the passage
of Nicaraguan guerrillas from Costa Rica into Nicaragua.
Bogantes, who recently returned from attending the May Day
celebrations in Cuba, was assigned this responsibility by the
Costa Rican Communist Party.
Honduras
The Honduran armed forces began to move against a group
of pro-Castro guerrillas operating against the Nicaraguan Govern-
ment and active in the vicinity of the Nicaraguan-Honduran border.
The Nicaraguan National Guard has been conducting operations
on its side of the border against the insurgents since July.
The dense jungle and difficult terrain, however, will impede the
efforts of both forces to eliminate the guerrillas.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424014 Page 23
J

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_5.jpeg ---
+ :
SECAET
until such time as the Soviets develop their own refueling facilities
at Conakry.
Instructed Embassy Rio to approach Brazilian
authorities to express our deep concern at the growing frequency
of Cuban non-scheduled flights to Brasil and request their
ooperation in curbing them. Also instructed our Fubaseles
in several Latin American countrie to work with CIA station
chiefs in furnishing the names of nationals of those countries
travelling on these flights to local authorities and urging
them: (1) to institute tighter controle on their own citizens
travelling to Cuba, end (2) to express their concern to the
Government
ROVERE of Brazil'Over Cuban use of Brasil as a way station
for transporting subversives.
As a result of representations made to the British
goverment about Cuban flights to the Cayman Islands carrying
Latin American subversives, the British developed an administrative
scheme which will effectively prohibit the use of British
a
Caribbean depondencies by Cubana es transit points for passengers.
The British intend to require transit visas of passengers passing
through their areas, and to reject applications for such visas
except in certain special cases. Persons not possessing visas
would be prevented from leaving their aircraft, or would be
()
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 5

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_6.jpeg ---
t
SECRET
also
FLA
returned to their point of origin.
4. Instructed Embassy Mexico City on August 29 to
inform the Mexican airline CMA that the United States is
opposed to a proposal that CMA operate charter flights to carry
refugees from Havana to Central America. CMA, as a result,
stated that they had no intention of proceeding further with
this project.
Instructed U.S. Missions in Curacao and the Hla gue
to investigate a report that KLM was planning to renew sh
scheduled Curacao-Habana flights and to reiterate US opposition
to resumption of air service to Cuba. KLM assured our Embassy
that there is no plan to initiate service, scheduled or non-
scheduled, to Habana.
f. Instructed Embassy Ottawa to express our strong
objections to a proposal that a Cubans charter flight pick up
e second group of U.S. students in Montreal to fly them to Cuba.
The flight was not authorized.
Instructed Consulate Georgetown to investigate
Cubana approaches to secure flight facilities. Mission reported
en August 1 that the Governor had no knowledge of any talks
between the B.G. Ministry of Communications and the Cuban Govern-
ment regarding landing rights for Cubana planes. The Governor
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 6

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_7.jpeg ---
SECRET
indicated his intention to inquire further and to keep us
advised. London reported that neither the Cuban nor the British
Guiana Govermente had raised the issue of Landing rights with
H.M.G.
h. Urged the governments of Mexico, Canada, Jamaica
and the Netherlands to refuse to assist the Cuban government
eturn of the
the 58 Americaa
in its efforts to find a short route for retuIn
students who illegally travelled to Cuba. Also informed Pan
American Airways that we were opposed to a Cuban request for
# PAA charter flight to fly the studente from Habana to New York.
1. Instructed our missions at Port of Spain and
Barbados on adveral occasions to appreach these governments to
express the concern of the U.S. at indications of Cuban interest
in the use of their aviation facilities.
Embassy Port of Spain discussed with the Foreign Secretary
of Trinidad various legal moves available that would enable
GOTT to control movements of aircraft within their territory,
citing examples of such controls instituted by Mexico, Canada
and Ireland. He indicated receptiveness to the proposal that
the list of suggestions be made available to the aviation officials
concerned
j. During a previous reporting period Embassy Santiago
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 7
27
M

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_8.jpeg ---
SECRET
...
urged the government of Chile to refuse visas to Cuban delegatês
to a preparatory meeting planning for the II Latin American
Youth Congress scheduled for August in the Chilean capital.
Inability of Cuban delegates to obtain Chilean visas for this
meeting is one of the contributing factors to the Cuban sponsors
announcing during August that the meeting had been postponed.
Sent general instructions to our missions in countries
which participate in the International Union of Architects asking
them to urge the cooperation of governmental authorities in
preventing or discouraging the attendance of their citizens to
the VII UIA Congress in Habana, September 29-October 4, 1963.
Followed this up with instructions to individual posts to try
where feasible to dissuade architects from free world countries
from serving on the jury for the selection of a Bay of Pige
1. Urged Canadian Government to block a plan to
commence food parcel shipments to Cuba, on a Commercial basis,
that would have required the establishment of scheduled weekly
charter flights by Canadian planes.
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 8
n
SECRET
}
}

--- Image 198-10007-10021_page_9.jpeg ---
5
SECRET
-7-
2. Control of Movement of Cuban Proneranda
Central Intelligence Agency
Responding to the urging of the CIA Station police
of the State of Guanabara seized large quantities of prope-
ganda brought into Brazil by passengers on the special Cubana
flights. For example, some 50 pounds of printed propagando
was taken from the various passengers who arrived on the 16
August Cubana flight.
3. Control of Clandestine Movement of Guerrillas and Arms
Department of Defense
Continued surveillance of the area surrounding Cuba
during the month of July at the same rate and with the same
emphasis as prior to 1 July 1963.
b. Continued to maintain U.S. Forces, primarily from
within the Atlantic Command, available to assist other Caribbean
governments in the interception of suspicious craft in
territorial waters, as might be requested. No such requests were
received from any other government during the period covered by
this report.
0.9.
However, U.S. Forces did keep track of the
location of the Soviet merchant freighter MITCHURINSK, which
t2
NW 50955
DocId: 32424014 Page 9
SECRET
: